<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>VII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-2" id="chapter2-7" epub:type="chapter">
			<h4>Manœuvres</h4>
			<p>Shortly before midnight they rode out from the Palace of the old Broletto: Facino, attended by Bellarion for his esquire, a page bestriding a mule that was laden with his armour, and a half-dozen men-at-arms.</p>
			<p>Facino was silent and pensive. His lady’s farewells had lacked the tenderness he craved, and the Duke whose battles he went to fight had not even been present to speed him. He had left the palace to go forth upon this campaign, slinking away like a discharged lackey. The Duke, he had been told, was absent, and for all that he was well aware of the Duke’s detestable pernoctations, he preferred to believe that this was merely another expression of that ill will which, despite all that he had done and all that it lay in his power to do, the Duke never failed to display towards him.</p>
			<p>But as the little company rode in the bright moonlight down the borgo of Porta Giovia, out of a narrow side street emerged a bulky man, almost dragged along by three great hounds straining at the leash and yelping eagerly, their noses to the ground. A slender figure in a cloak followed after him, calling petulantly as he came:</p>
			<p>“Not so fast, Squarcia! Body of God! Not so fast, I say. I am out of breath!”</p>
			<p>There was no mistaking that strident voice. It was the Duke, himself, and close upon his heels came six armed lackeys to make a bodyguard.</p>
			<p>Squarcia and his powerful hounds crossed the main street of the borgo, almost under the head of Facino’s horse, the brawny huntsman panting and swearing as he went.</p>
			<p>“I cannot hold them back, Lord Duke,” he answered. “They’re hot upon the scent, and strong as mules, devil take them!”</p>
			<p>He vanished down the dark gulf of an alley. From the leader of the Duke’s bodyguard came a challenge:</p>
			<p>“Who goes there at this hour?”</p>
			<p>Facino loosed a laugh that was full of bitterness.</p>
			<p>“Facino Cane, Lord Duke, going to the wars.”</p>
			<p>“It makes you laugh, eh?” The Duke approached him. He had missed the bitterness of the laughter, or else the meaning of that bitterness.</p>
			<p>“Oh yes, it makes me laugh. I go to fight the battles of the Duke of Milan. It is my business and my pleasure. I leave you, Lord Duke, to yours.”</p>
			<p>“Aye, aye! Bring me back the head of that rogue Buonterzo. Good fortune to you!”</p>
			<p>“Your highness is gracious.”</p>
			<p>“God be with you!” He moved on. “That rogue Squarcia is getting too far ahead. Ho, there! Squarcia! Damn your vile soul! Not so fast!” The gloom of the alley absorbed him. His bodyguard followed.</p>
			<p>Again Facino laughed. “ ‘God be with me,’ says the Duke’s magnificence. May the devil be with him. I wonder upon what foulness he is bent to-night, Bellarion.” He touched his horse with the spur. “Forward!”</p>
			<p>They came to the Castle of Porta Giovia, the vast fortress of Gian Galeazzo, built as much for the city’s protection from without as for his own from the city. The drawbridge was lowered to receive them, and they rode into the great courtyard of San Donato, which was thronged with men-at-arms and bullock-carts laden with the necessaries of the campaign. Here, in the inner courtyard and in the great plain beyond the walls of both castle and city, the army of Facino was drawn up, marshalled by Carmagnola.</p>
			<p>Facino rode through the castle, issuing brief orders here and there as he went, then, at the far end of the plain beyond, at the very head of the assembled forces, he took up his station attended by Bellarion, Beppo the page, and his little personal bodyguard. There he remained for close upon an hour, and in the moonlight, supplemented by a dozen flaring barrels of tar, he reviewed the army as it filed past and took the road south towards Melegnano.</p>
			<p>The order of the going had been preconcerted between Facino and his lieutenant Carmagnola, and it was Carmagnola who led the vanguard, made up of five hundred mounted men of the civic militia of Milan and three hundred German infantry, a mixed force composed of Bavarians, Swabians, and Saxons, trailing the ponderous German pike which was fifteen feet in length. They were uniform at least in that all were stalwart, bearded men, and they sang as they marched, swinging vigorously to the rhythm of their outlandish song. They were commanded by a Swabian named Koenigshofen.</p>
			<p>Next came de Cadillac with the French horse, of whom eight hundred rode in armour with lances erect, an imposing array of mounted steel which flashed ruddily in the flare from the tar barrels; the remaining two hundred made up a company of mounted arbalesters.</p>
			<p>After the French came an incredibly long train of lumbering wagons drawn by oxen, and laden, some with the ordinary baggage of the army⁠—tents, utensils, arms, munitions, and the like⁠—and the others with mangonels and siege implements including a dozen cannon.</p>
			<p>Finally came the rearguard composed of Facino’s own condotta, increased by recent recruitings to twelve hundred men-at-arms and supplemented by three hundred Switzers under Werner von Stoffel, of whom a hundred were arbalesters and the remainder infantry armed with the short but terribly effective Swiss halbert.</p>
			<p>When the last had marched away to be absorbed into the darkness, and the song of the Germans at the head of the column had faded out of earshot, muffled by the tramp of the rearguard, Facino with his little knot of personal attendants set out to follow.</p>
			<p>Towards noon of the following day, with Melegnano well behind them, they came to a halt in the hamlet of Ospedaletto, having covered twenty-five miles in that first almost unbroken march. The pace was not one that could be maintained, nor would it have been maintained so long but that Facino was in haste to reach the south bank of the Po before Buonterzo could cross. Therefore, leaving the main army to rest at Ospedaletto, he pushed on with five hundred lances as far as Piacenza. With these at need he could hold the bridgehead, whilst waiting for the main army to join him on the morrow.</p>
			<p>At Piacenza, however, there was still no sign of the enemy, and in the Scotti who held the city⁠—one of the possessions wrested from the Duchy of Milan⁠—Facino found an unexpected ally. Buonterzo had sent to demand passage of the Scotti. And the Scotti, with the true brigand instinct of their kind, had replied by offering him passage on terms. But Buonterzo, the greater brigand, had mocked the proposal, sending word back that, unless he were made free of the bridge, he would cross by force and clean up the town in passing. As a consequence, whilst Buonterzo’s advance was retarded by the necessity of reaching Piacenza in full force, Facino was given free and unhindered passage by the Scotti, so that he might act as a buckler for them.</p>
			<p>Having brought his army on the morrow safely across the Po, Facino assembled it on the left bank of the little river Nure. He destroyed the bridge by which the Æmilian Way crosses the stream at Pontenure, and sat down to await Buonterzo, who was now reported to be at Firenzuola, ten miles away.</p>
			<p>Buonterzo, however, did not come directly on, but, quitting the Æmilian Way, struck south, and, crossing the shallow hills into the valley of the Nure, threatened thence to descend upon Facino’s flank.</p>
			<p>That was the beginning of a series of movements, of marchings and counter-marchings, which endured for a full week without ever bringing the armies in sight of each other. These manœuvres carried them gradually south, and their operations became a game of hide-and-seek among the hills.</p>
			<p>At first it bewildered Bellarion that two commanders, each of whom had for aim the destruction of the other, should appear so sedulously to avoid an engagement. But in the end, he came to understand the spirit actuating them. Each fought with mercenary troops, and just as it is not the business of mercenaries to get themselves killed, neither is it their business to slay if slaughter can be avoided. They fought for profit, and whilst prisoners were profitable, since they yielded not only arms and horses, but also ransoms, dead men yielded nothing beyond their harness. Therefore they demanded that their commanders should lead them as nearly as possible into a position of such strategical advantage that the enemy, perceiving himself at their mercy, should have no choice but to surrender. To this general rule the only exception was afforded by the Swiss, who were indifferent to bloodshed. But of Swiss there were only a few on Facino’s side, and none at all on Buonterzo’s.</p>
			<p>At the end of a week, after endless manœuvres, matters were very much as they had been at the beginning. Buonterzo had fallen back again on Firenzuola, hoping to draw Facino into open country, whilst Facino, refusing to be drawn, lay patiently at San Nicoló.</p>
			<p>Three days Facino waited there, to be suddenly startled by the news that Buonterzo was at Aggazano, eight miles away. Suspecting here an attempt to slip past him and, by crossing perhaps at Stradella, to invade the territory of Milan, and also because he conceived that Buonterzo had placed himself in a disadvantageous position, leaving an opening for attack, Facino decided upon instant action.</p>
			<p>In the best house of San Nicoló, which he had temporarily adopted for his quarters, Facino assembled on the morning of the 10th of May his chief officers, Francesco Busone of Carmagnola, Koenigshofen, the Swiss Werner von Stoffel, and the French commander de Cadillac.</p>
			<p>In a small plain room on the ground floor, darkened by semi-closed shutters to exclude the too ardent sun, they were gathered, Bellarion with them, about the plain deal table at which Facino sat. On the table’s white surface the condottiero with a stick of charcoal had drawn a map which if rough was fairly accurate of scale. In the past week Bellarion had seen and studied a half-dozen such charts and had come to read them readily.</p>
			<p>Charcoal stick in hand, Facino expounded.</p>
			<p>“Buonterzo lies here, and the speed at which he has moved from Firenzuola will constrain him to rest there, whatever his ultimate intention.”</p>
			<p>Carmagnola interposed. He was a large young man, handsome, florid, and self-assured.</p>
			<p>“He is too favourably placed for an attack from the plain. At Aggazano he holds the slopes, whence he can roll down like an avalanche.”</p>
			<p>“You are interrupting me, Francesco.” Facino’s voice was dry and cold. “And you point out the obvious. It is not my intention to make a frontal attack; but merely to simulate one. Here is my plan: I divide the army into two battles. One of these, composed of the French horse, the civic militia, and Koenigshofen’s pikes, you shall lead, Francesco, marching directly upon Aggazano, as if intending to attack. Thus you engage Buonterzo’s attention, and pin him there. Meanwhile with the remainder of the forces I, myself, march up the valley of the Trebbia as far as Travo, and then, striking over the hills, descend thence upon Buonterzo’s camp. That will be the moment of your simulated attack from the plain below to become real, so that whichever way Buonterzo turns, we are upon his rear.”</p>
			<p>There was a murmur of approval from the four officers. Facino looked from one to another, smiling a little. “No situation could be better suited for such a manœuvre.”</p>
			<p>And now Bellarion, the chess-player and student of the art of war, greatly daring, yet entirely unconscious of it, presumed to advance a criticism.</p>
			<p>“The weakness lies in the assumption that this situation will be maintained until action is joined.”</p>
			<p>Carmagnola gasped, and with Koenigshofen and de Cadillac gave the young man a stare of haughty, angry amazement. Facino laughed outright, at so much impudence.</p>
			<p>Werner von Stoffel, between whom and Bellarion a certain friendship had sprung up during the months they had spent together at Abbiategrasso, was the only one who spared his feelings, whilst Facino, having vented his scorn in laughter, condescended to explain.</p>
			<p>“We ensure that by the speed of our onset, which will leave him no time to move. It is the need for rest that has made him take up this strong position. Its very strength is the trap in which we’ll take him.” He rose, brushing the matter aside. “Come! The details each of you can work out for himself. What imports is that we should move at once, leave camp and baggage so that we may march unhampered. Here speed is all.”</p>
			<p>But Bellarion was so little abashed by their contempt that he actually returned to the attack.</p>
			<p>“If I were in Buonterzo’s place,” he said, “I should have scouts along the heights from Rivergaro to Travo. Upon discovering your intentions from your movements, I should first descend upon Carmagnola’s force, and, having routed it, I should come round and on, to engage your own. Thus the division of forces upon which you count for success might easily be made the cause of your ruin.”</p>
			<p>Again there was a silence of amazement at this babe in warlike matters who thrust his opinions upon the notice of tried soldiers.</p>
			<p>“Let us thank God,” said Carmagnola with stinging sarcasm, “that you do not command Buonterzo’s troops, or our overthrow would be assured.” And he led the rather cruel laughter, which at last silenced Bellarion.</p>
			<p>The two battles into which the army was divided moved at dusk, leaving all baggage and even the cannon, of which Facino judged that he would have no need in operations of the character intended. Before midnight Carmagnola had reached his station within a mile of Aggazano, and Facino was at Travo, ready to breast the slopes at dawn, and from their summit descend upon Buonterzo’s camp.</p>
			<p>Meanwhile the forces rested, and Facino himself snatched a few hours’ sleep in a green tent which had hurriedly been pitched for him.</p>
			<p>Bellarion, however, too excited by the prospect of action to think of sleeping, and rendered uneasy by his apprehensions, paced by the river which murmured at that point over a broad shallow, its waters sadly shrunken by the recent drought. Here in his pacings he was joined by Stoffel.</p>
			<p>“I did not laugh at you to-day,” the Swiss reminded him.</p>
			<p>“I have to thank you for that courtesy,” said Bellarion gravely.</p>
			<p>“Courtesy wasn’t in my mind.”</p>
			<p>A patriotic Swiss and an able soldier, Stoffel had the appearance of neither. He was of middle height and a gracefully slim figure which he dressed with elegance and care. His face was shaven, long and olive-skinned with a well-bridged nose and dark pensive eyes under straight black eyebrows. There was about him something mincing and delicate, but entirely pleasant, for with it all he was virile and intrepid.</p>
			<p>“You voiced,” he said now, “a possibility which should not have been left outside their calculations.”</p>
			<p>“I have never seen a battle,” said Bellarion. “But I do not need to see one to know that all strategy is bad which does not consider and provide for every likely counter-move that is discernible.”</p>
			<p>“And the counter-move you suggested was discernible enough⁠—at least, when you suggested it.”</p>
			<p>Bellarion looked at the Swiss so far as the Swiss was visible in the faint radiance of that warm summer night.</p>
			<p>“Thinking as you do, why did you not support me, Stoffel?”</p>
			<p>“Carmagnola and de Cadillac are soldiers of repute, and so is even Koenigshofen, whilst I am but the captain of a small body of Swiss infantry whose office it is to carry out the duties imposed upon him. I do not give advice unasked, which is why even now I dare not suggest to Facino that he repair his omission to place scouts on the heights. He takes Buonterzo’s vulnerability too much for granted.”</p>
			<p>Bellarion smiled. “Which is why you seek me; hoping that I will suggest it to him.”</p>
			<p>“I think it would be well.”</p>
			<p>Bellarion considered. “We could do better, Stoffel. We could go up ourselves, and make observations.”</p>
			<p>They came an hour or so later to the crest of the hill, and there remained on watch for some two hours until the light of dawn was strong enough to disclose to them in detail the slopes towards Aggazano. And what they saw in that cold grey light was the realisation, if not of the exact possibility Bellarion had voiced, at least of something very near akin. The difference lay in that, instead of moving first against Carmagnola and later against Facino, Buonterzo was beginning with the latter course. And Bellarion instantly perceived the advantages of this. Buonterzo could descend upon Facino from above in a position of enormous tactical advantage, and, having destroyed him, go round to meet Carmagnola on level terms of ground.</p>
			<p>The order of the movements, however, was a detail of comparative unimportance. What mattered was that Buonterzo was actually moving to destroy severally the two battles into which Facino had divided his army. In the upland valley to the north, a couple of miles away, already breasting the gentle slopes towards the summit from which Bellarion and Stoffel observed them, swarmed the whole army of Ottone Buonterzo.</p>
			<p>The watchers waited for no more. Down the hill again to Travo they raced and came breathless into the tent where Facino slept. Their news effectively awakened him. He wasted no time in futile raging, but, summoning his officers, issued orders instantly to marshal the men and march down the valley so as to go round to effect a reunion with Carmagnola’s battle.</p>
			<p>“It will never be effected that way.” said Bellarion quietly.</p>
			<p>Facino scowled at him, dismissed the officers to their tasks, and, when only Stoffel remained, angrily demanded of Bellarion what the devil he meant by constantly intruding opinions that were not sought.</p>
			<p>“If the last opinion I intruded had been weighed,” said Bellarion, “you would not now be in this desperate case.”</p>
			<p>“Desperate!” Facino almost exploded on the word. “How is it desperate?”</p>
			<p>“Come outside, my lord.”</p>
			<p>To humour his self-sufficiency, to allow it to swell into a monstrous bubble which when fully swollen he would reduce to nothing by a single prick, Facino went with him from the tent, Stoffel gravely following. And in the open, by the river under that long line of shallow hills, Bellarion expounded the situation in the manner of a pedant lecturing a scholar.</p>
			<p>“Already, by his present position, Buonterzo has driven the wedge too deeply between yourself and Carmagnola. A reunion of forces is no longer possible by marching down the valley. In less than an hour Buonterzo will command the heights, and observe your every movement. He will be at a centre, whence he can hurl his force along a radius to strike you at whatever point of the periphery you chance to occupy. And he will strike you with more than twice your numbers, falling upon your flank from a position of vantage which would still render him irresistible if he had half your strength. Your position, my lord, with the river on your other flank, is much as was the position of the Austrians at Morgarten when they were utterly broken by the Swiss.”</p>
			<p>Facino’s impatience and anger had gradually undergone a transmutation into wonder and dismay, and he knew not whether to be more dismayed because he had failed to perceive the situation for himself, or because it was pointed out to him by one whose knowledge of the art of war was all derived from books.</p>
			<p>Without answering, he stood there brooding, chin in hand, striving to master his bitter vexation.</p>
			<p>“If you had heeded me yesterday⁠—” Bellarion was beginning, which was very human, but hardly generous, when Facino roughly cut him short.</p>
			<p>“Peace!” he growled. “What is done is done. We have to deal with what we find.” He turned to Stoffel. “We must retreat across the river before Buonterzo thrusts us into it. There is a ford here above Travo at this height of water.”</p>
			<p>“That,” ventured Stoffel, “is but to increase our separation from Carmagnola.”</p>
			<p>“Don’t I know it?” roared Facino, now thoroughly in a rage with himself and all the world. “Do you suppose I can perceive nothing? Let a messenger ride at once to Carmagnola, ordering him to fall back, and cross below Rivergaro. The river should be fordable just below the islands. Thus it is possible he might be able to rejoin me.”</p>
			<p>“It should certainly be possible,” the Swiss agreed, “if Buonterzo pursues us across the ford, intent upon delivering battle whilst the odds are so heavily in his favour.”</p>
			<p>“I am counting upon that. We draw him on, refusing battle until Carmagnola is also across and in his rear. Thus we’ll snatch victory from defeat.”</p>
			<p>“But if he doesn’t follow?” quoth Bellarion. And again, in spite of what had happened, Facino frowned his haughty impatience of this fledgling’s presumption. Unintimidated, Bellarion went on: “If you were in Buonterzo’s place, would you follow, when, by remaining on this bank and marching down the valley, you might keep the two enemy battles apart so as to engage each at your convenience?”</p>
			<p>“If Buonterzo were to do that, I should recross, and he would then have me upon his rear. After all, if his position has advantages, it has also disadvantages. However he turn he will be between two forces.”</p>
			<p>“Which is no disadvantage to him unless the two can operate simultaneously, and this he can prevent once you have crossed the river by leaving a force to watch you and dispute your passage should you attempt to return. And for that a small force will suffice. With a hundred well-posted arbalesters I could hold that ford for a day against an enemy.”</p>
			<p>“You could?” Facino almost laughed.</p>
			<p>“I could, and I will if the plan commends itself to you.”</p>
			<p>“What plan?”</p>
			<p>It was a plan that had occurred to Bellarion even as they argued, inspired by the very arguments they had used. He had been conning the ground beyond the water, a line of shallow hills, with a grey limestone bluff crowned by a dense wood of lofty elms commanding the ford itself.</p>
			<p>“Buonterzo should be drawn to pursue you across the river, which might easily happen if you cross in full sight of his forces and with all the appearance of disorder. An army in flight is an almost irresistible lure to an overwhelming force. It was thus that Duke William of Normandy ensured his own ultimate victory at Senlac. The slopes across the water offer no difficulty to a pursuer, and the prospect of bringing you to an engagement before Carmagnola can rejoin you should prove too seductive. It should even render Buonterzo obstinate when he finds his passage disputed. And for this, as I have said, a hundred arbalesters will suffice. In the end he must either force a passage, or decide to abandon the attempt and go instead against Carmagnola first. But before either happens, if you act promptly, you may have rejoined Carmagnola by crossing to him at Rivergaro, and then come round the hills upon Buonterzo’s rear, thus turning the tables upon him. Whether he is still here, attempting to cross, or whether he is marching off down the valley, he will be equally at your mercy if you are swift. And I will undertake to hold him until sunset with a hundred crossbowmen.”</p>
			<p>Overwhelmed with amazement by that lucid exposition of a masterly plan, Facino stood and stared at him in silence. Gravely, at last, he asked him: “And if you fail?”</p>
			<p>“I shall still have held him long enough to enable you to extricate yourself from the trap in which you are now caught.”</p>
			<p>Facino’s bewildered glance sought the dark, comely face of Stoffel. He smiled grimly. “Am I a fool, Stoffel, that a boy should instruct me in the art by which I have lived? And would you trust a hundred of your Swiss to this same boy?”</p>
			<p>“With confidence.”</p>
			<p>But still Facino hesitated. “You realise, Bellarion, that if the passage is forced before I arrive, it will go very hard with you?”</p>
			<p>Bellarion shrugged in silence. Facino thought he was not understood.</p>
			<p>“Such an action as you propose will entail great slaughter, perhaps. Buonterzo will be impatient of that, and he may terribly avenge it.”</p>
			<p>Bellarion smiled. “He will have to cross first, and meanwhile I shall count upon his impatience and vindictiveness to hold him here when he should be elsewhere.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
