<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XII: Count Spigno</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-1" id="chapter1-12" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XII</h3>
				<p epub:type="title">Count Spigno</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>Spigno set the lantern on the floor, and came forward. “No need to talk,” he muttered. “Roll over so that I can free your hands.” He drew his dagger and with it cut Bellarion’s bonds.</p>
			<p>“Take off your shoes. Make haste.”</p>
			<p>Bellarion squatted upon his bedding, and with blundering fingers, still numb from the thong, he removed his footgear. His wits worked briskly, and it was not at all upon the subject of his escape that they were busy. Despite his late resolves, and although still far from being out of peril, with the chance of salvation no more than in sight, he was already at his knight-errantry again.</p>
			<p>He stood up at last, and Spigno was whispering urgently.</p>
			<p>“Wait! We must not go together. Give me five minutes to win clear; then follow.”</p>
			<p>Bellarion considered him, and his eyes were very grave.</p>
			<p>“But when my evasion is discovered⁠ ⁠…” he was beginning.</p>
			<p>Spigno impatiently broke in, explaining hurriedly.</p>
			<p>“I am the last they will suspect. The others are all here tonight. But I pleaded urgent reasons why I could not remain. I made a pretence of departing; then hid below until all were asleep. They will be at each other’s throats in the morning over this.” He smiled darkly in satisfaction of his cunning. “I’ll take the light. You know your way about this house better than I do. Tread softly when you come.”</p>
			<p>He was turning to take up the lantern when Bellarion arrested him.</p>
			<p>“You’ll wait for me outside?”</p>
			<p>“To what end? Nay, now. There is no purpose in that.”</p>
			<p>“Let me come with you, then. If I should stumble in the dark they’ll be upon me.”</p>
			<p>“Take care that you do not.”</p>
			<p>“At least leave me your dagger since you take the light.”</p>
			<p>“Here, then.” Spigno unsheathed and surrendered the weapon to him.</p>
			<p>Bellarion gripped the hilt. With very sombre eyes he considered the Count. Then the latter turned aside again for the lantern.</p>
			<p>“A moment,” said Bellarion.</p>
			<p>“What now?”</p>
			<p>Impatiently Spigno faced once more the queer glance of those dark eyes, and in that moment Bellarion stabbed him.</p>
			<p>It was a swift, hard-driven, merciful stroke that found the unfortunate man’s heart and quenched his life before he had time to realise that it was threatened.</p>
			<p>Without a sound he reeled back under the blow. Bellarion’s left arm went round his shoulders to ease him to the ground. But Spigno’s limbs sagged under him. He sank through Bellarion’s embrace like an empty sack, and then rolled over sideways.</p>
			<p>The murderer choked back a sob. His legs were trembling like empty hose with which the wind makes sport. His face was leaden-hued and his sight was blurred by tears. He went down on his knees beside the dead count, turned him on his back, straightened out the twitching limbs, and folded the arms across the breast. Nor did he rise when this was done.</p>
			<p>In slaying Count Spigno, he had performed a necessary act; necessary in the service to which he had dedicated himself. Thus at a blow he had shattered the instrument upon which the Marquis Theodore was depending to encompass his nephew’s ruin; and the discovery tomorrow of Spigno’s death and Bellarion’s own evasion, in circumstances of unfathomable mystery, must strike such terror into the hearts of the conspirators that there would probably be an end to the plotting which served no purpose but to advance the Regent’s schemes.</p>
			<p>Yet, despite these heartening reflections, Bellarion could not shake off his horror. He had done murder, and he had done it in cold blood, deliberate and calculatingly. Worse than all⁠—his convent rearing asserting itself here⁠—he had sent a man unshriven to confront his Maker. He hoped that the unexpectedness with which Spigno’s doom had overtaken him would be weighed in the balance against the sins which death had surprised upon him.</p>
			<p>That is why he remained on his knees and with joined hands prayed fervently and passionately for the repose of the soul which he had despatched to judgment. So intent was he that he took no heed of the precious time that was meanwhile speeding. For perhaps a quarter of an hour he continued there in prayer, then crossing himself he rose at last and gave thought to his own escape.</p>
			<p>Thrusting his shoes into his belt and muffling the lantern as Spigno had muffled it, he set out, the naked dagger in his right hand.</p>
			<p>A stair creaked under his step and then another, and each time he checked and caught his breath, listening intently. Once he fancied that he heard a movement below, and the sound so alarmed him that it was some moments before he could proceed.</p>
			<p>He gained the floor below in safety, and rounding the balusters continued his cautious descent towards the mezzanine, where, as he knew, Barbaresco slept. Midway down he heard that sound again, this time unmistakably the sound of someone moving in the passage to the right, in the direction of Barbaresco’s room. He stopped abruptly, and thrust the muffled lantern behind him, so that the faint glow of it might not beat downwards upon the gloom to betray him. He was conscious of pulses drumming in his temples, for shaken by the night’s events he was now become an easy prey to fear.</p>
			<p>Suddenly to his increasing horror, another, stronger light fell along the passage. It grew steadily as he watched it, and with it came a sound of softly shod feet, a mutter in a voice that he knew for Barbaresco’s, and an answering mutter in the high-pitched voice of Barbaresco’s old servant.</p>
			<p>His first impulse was to turn and flee upwards, back the way he had come. But thus he would be rushing into a trap, which would be closed by Barbaresco’s guests, who slept most probably above.</p>
			<p>Then, bracing himself for whatever fate might send, he bounded boldly and swiftly forward, no longer troubling to tread lightly. His aim was to round the stairs and thereafter trust to speed to complete the descent and gain the street. But the noise he made brought Barbaresco hurrying forward, and at the foot of that flight they confronted each other, Bellarion’s way barred by the gentleman of Casale who loosed at sight of him a roar that roused the house.</p>
			<p>Barbaresco was in bedgown and slippers, a candle in one hand; his servant following at his heels. He was unarmed. But not on that account could he shirk the necessity of tackling and holding this fugitive, whose flight itself was an abundant advertisement of his treachery, and whose evasion now might be attended by direst results.</p>
			<p>He passed the candle to his servant, and flung himself bodily upon Bellarion, pinning the young man’s arms to his sides, and roaring lustily the while. Bellarion struggled silently and grimly in that embrace which was like the hug of a bear, for despite his corpulence Barbaresco was as strong as he was heavy. But the grip he had taken, whilst having the advantage of pinning down the hand that held the dagger, was one that it is impossible long to maintain upon an opponent of any vigour; and before he could sufficiently bend him to receive his weight, Bellarion had broken loose. Old Andrea, the servant, having set the candle upon the floor, was running in now to seize Bellarion’s legs. He knocked Andrea over, winded by a well-directed kick in the stomach, then swung aloft his dagger as Barbaresco rushed at him again. It was in his mind, as he afterwards declared, that he did not desire another murder on his soul that night. But if another murder there must be, he preferred that it should not be his own. So he struck without pity. Barbaresco swerved, throwing up his right arm to parry the blow, and received the long blade to the hilt in his fleshy forearm.</p>
			<p>He fell back, clapping his hand to the bubbling wound and roaring like a bull in pain, just as Casella, almost naked, but sword in hand, came bounding down the stairs with Lungo and yet another following.</p>
			<p>For a second it seemed to Bellarion that he had struck too late. If he attempted now to regain the staircase he must inevitably be cut off, and how could he hope with a dagger to meet Casella’s sword? Then, on a new thought, he darted forward, and plunged into the long room of that mezzanine. He slammed the door, and shot home the bolts, before Casella and Lungo brought up against it on the other side.</p>
			<p>He uncovered at last his lantern and set it down. He dragged the heavy table across the door, so as to reenforce it against their straining shoulders. Then snatching up the cloak in which the lantern had been muffled he made for the window, and threw it open.</p>
			<p>He paused to put on his shoes, what time the baffled conspirators were battering and straining at the door. Then he forced the naked dagger as far as it would go into the empty sheath that dangled from his own belt, and tied a corner of the cloak securely to one of the stone mullions so that some five or six feet of it dangled below the sill. Onto this sill he climbed, turned, knelt, and laid hold of the cloak with both hands.</p>
			<p>He had but to let himself down hand over hand for the length of cloth, and then only an easy drop of a few feet would lie between himself and safety.</p>
			<p>But even as he addressed himself to this, the house-door below was opened with a clatter, and out into the street sprang two of the conspirators.</p>
			<p>He groaned as he looked down upon them from his precarious position. Whilst they, in their shirts, capering fantastically as it seemed to him in the shaft of light that cut athwart the gloom from the open door, brandished their glittering blades and waited.</p>
			<p>Since there could be no salvation in climbing back, he realised that he was at the end of the wild career he had run since leaving the peace of the Grazie a week ago. A week! He had lived a lifetime in that week, and he had looked more than once in the face of death. He thought of the Abbot’s valedictory words: “<i xml:lang="la">Pax multa in cella, foris autem plurima bella</i>.” What would he not give now to be back in the peace of that convent cell!</p>
			<p>As he hung there, between two deaths, he sought to compose his mind to prayer, to prepare his soul for judgment, by an act of contrition for his sins. Nor could he in that supreme hour take comfort in his old heresy that sin is a human fiction.</p>
			<p>And then, even as his despair of body and spirit touched its nadir, he caught a sound that instantly heartened him: the approach of regularly tramping feet.</p>
			<p>Those below heard it, too. The watch was on its rounds. The murderous twain took counsel for a moment. Then, fearing to be surprised there, they darted through the doorway, and closed the door again, just as the patrol with lanterns swinging from their halberts came round the corner not a dozen yards away.</p>
			<p>With nothing to fear from these, Bellarion now let himself swiftly down the length of the cloak and dropped lightly to the ground.</p>
			<p>He was breathing easily and oddly disposed to laugh when the officer came up with him, and the patrol of six made a half-circle round him.</p>
			<p>“What’s this?” he was challenged. “Why do you prefer a window to a door, my friend?”</p>
			<p>Bellarion was still seeking a plausible answer when the officer’s face came nearer to his own upon which the light was beating down. Recognition was mutual. It was that same officer who had hunted him from the tavern of the Stag to the Palace gardens.</p>
			<p>“By the Blood!” cried Messer Bernabó. “It is Lorenzaccio’s fleet young friend. Well met, my cockerel! I’ve been seeking you this week. You shall tell me where you’ve been hiding.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
