<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>V: The Commune of Milan</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-2" id="chapter2-5" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</h3>
				<p epub:type="title">The Commune of Milan</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>“They deafen us with their acclamations of you, those sons of dogs!”</p>
			<p>Thus the Duke, in angry greeting of the great condottiero, who was not only the last of his father’s captains to stand beside him in his hour of need, but the only one who had refrained from taking arms against him. Nor did he leave it there. “Me they distracted with their howling lamentations when I rode abroad this morning. They need a lesson in loyalty, I think. I’ll afford it them one of these fine days. I will so, by the bones of Saint Ambrose! I’ll show them who is Duke of Milan.”</p>
			<p>There was a considerable concourse in the spacious chamber known as the Hall of Galeazzo, in which the Duke received the condottiero, and, as Facino’s wide-set, dark eyes raked their ranks, he perceived at once the influence that had been at work during his few months of absence. Here at the Duke’s elbow was the sinister della Torre, the leader of the Guelphic party, the head of the great House of the Torriani, who had striven once with the Visconti for supremacy in Milan, and in the background wherever he might look Facino saw only Guelphs, Casati, Bigli, Aliprandi, Biagi, Porri, and others. They were at their ease, and accompanied by wives and daughters, these men who two years ago would not have dared come within a mile of the Visconti Palace. Indeed, the only noteworthy Ghibelline present, and he was a man so amiably weak as to count for little in any party, was the Duke’s natural brother, Gabriello Maria, the son who had inherited the fine slender height, good looks, and red-gold hair of Gian Galeazzo.</p>
			<p>Facino was moved to anger. But he dissembled it.</p>
			<p>“The people perceive in me the possible saviour of your duchy.” He was smiling, but his eyes were hard. “It is well to propitiate those who have the power to serve us.”</p>
			<p>“Do you reprove his highness?” wondered della Torre, scowling.</p>
			<p>“Do you boast your power?” growled the Duke.</p>
			<p>“I rejoice in it since it is to be used in your potency’s service, unlike Buonterzo’s which is being used against you.”</p>
			<p>Behind Facino his Countess watched, and inwardly smiled. These fools were stirring her lord, it seemed, where she could not stir him.</p>
			<p>Gabriello, however, interposed to clear the air. “And you are very welcome, Lord Count; your coming is most timely.”</p>
			<p>The Duke flashed him a sidelong glance, and grunted: “Huh!”</p>
			<p>But Gabriello went on, his manner affable and courtly. “And his highness is grateful to you for the despatch you have used in responding to his call.”</p>
			<p>After all, as titular governor, Gabriello spoke with the voice of authority, in matters of administration being even superior to the Duke. And Facino, whose aim was far from provocative, was glad enough to pass through the door Gabriello held for him.</p>
			<p>“My despatch is natural enough since I have no object but the service of his highness and the duchy.”</p>
			<p>Later, however, when Facino attended a council that evening to determine measures a certain asperity was again in his tone.</p>
			<p>He came to the business exacerbated by another scene with his Countess, in which again she had upbraided him for not dealing with these men as their ill will deserved by seizing upon the duchy for himself.</p>
			<p>Della Torre’s undisguised malice, the Duke’s mean, vindictive, unreasoning jealousy, scarcely held in curb even by his needs, and Gabriello’s hopeless incompetence, almost drove Facino to conclude that Beatrice was in the right and that he was a fool to continue to serve where he might command.</p>
			<p>Trouble came when the question arose of the means at their command to resist Buonterzo, and Gabriello announced that the whole force under their hands amounted to the thousand mercenaries of Facino’s own condotta, commanded by his lieutenant, Francesco Busone of Carmagnola, and some five hundred foot made up of Milanese levies.</p>
			<p>Facino denounced this force as utterly inadequate, and informed the Council that to supplement it he had sent to Boucicault for a thousand men.</p>
			<p>“A thousand men!” Gabriello was aghast, and so were the others. “But a thousand men will cost the treasury⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>Facino interrupted him. “I have offered fifteen gold florins a month for each man and fifty for the officer commanding them. But my messenger is authorised to pay twice that sum if necessary.”</p>
			<p>“Fifteen thousand florins, and perhaps thirty thousand! Why, you’re surely mad! That is twice the sum contributed by the Commune. Whence is the remainder to come? His highness’s allowance is but two thousand five hundred florins a month.”</p>
			<p>“The Commune must be made to realise that the duchy is in danger of utter shipwreck. If Buonterzo sacks Milan, it will cost them fifty times the hire of these troops. So they must provide the means to defend it. It is your business, my lord, as one of the ducal governors, to make that clear to them.”</p>
			<p>“They will take the view that this levy is far beyond the needs of the case.”</p>
			<p>“You must persuade them of their error.”</p>
			<p>Gabriello became impatient in his turn. “How can I persuade them of what I do not, myself, believe? After all, Buonterzo cannot be in great strength. I doubt if his whole force amounts to more than a thousand men.”</p>
			<p>“You doubt!” Facino stormed now, and banged the table in his wrath. “Am I to get myself and my condotta cut to pieces because you allow conjecture to fill the place of knowledge? You set my reputation on the board in your reckless gambling.”</p>
			<p>“Your reputation stands high, Lord Count,” Gabriello sought to mollify him.</p>
			<p>“But how long will you let it stand so? I shall presently be known for improvidence and carelessness in estimating the enemy forces and in opposing my troops to impossible odds. Once I am given that character, where do you think I shall be able to hire men to follow me? Mercenaries who make a trade of war do not go into battle to get themselves slaughtered, and they do not follow leaders under whom this happens. That, my lord, you should know. I suffered enough last year against this same Buonterzo, when your reckless lack of information sent me with six hundred men to meet his four thousand. Then, as now, you argued that he was in small strength. That is not an error into which a condottiero is suffered to fall twice. Let it happen again, and I shall never be able to raise another condotta.”</p>
			<p>Gian Maria laughed softly, secretly nudged by della Torre. Facino span round on his stool to face the Duke, and his face was white with anger, for he read the meaning of that laugh. In his stupid jealousy the loutish prince would actually welcome such a consummation, unable to perceive its inevitable consequence to himself.</p>
			<p>“Your highness laughs! You will not laugh when it is accomplished. You will discover that when there is an end to me as a condottiero, there will be an end to your highness as Duke of Milan. Do you think these will save you?” And rising in his passion he swept a hand to indicate Gabriello, della Torre, and Lonate. “Who will follow Gabriello when he takes the field? All the world knows that his mother was a better soldier than he, and that when she died he could not hold Pisa. And how will these two poor pimps who fawn upon you serve you in your need?”</p>
			<p>Gian Maria, livid with anger was on his feet, too, by now. “By God! Facino, if you had dared say the half of this before my father’s face, your head would have been on the Broletto Tower.”</p>
			<p>“If I had said it before him, I should have deserved no less. I should deserve no less if I did not say it now. We need plain speaking here to clear away these vapours of suspicion and ill will.”</p>
			<p>Gian Maria’s wits, which ever worked sluggishly and crookedly, were almost paralysed now under the eyes of this stern soldier. Facino had ever been able to whistle him to heel, which was the thing he most detested in Facino. It was an influence which lately, during Facino’s absence, he had been able to shake off. But he found himself cowed now, despite the support he received from the presence of Facino’s enemies. It was della Torre who answered for him.</p>
			<p>“Is that a threat, Lord Count? Dare you suggest to his highness that you might follow the example of Buonterzo and the others? You plead for plain speaking. Be plain, then, so that his highness may know precisely what is in your mind.”</p>
			<p>“Aye!” cried his highness, glad enough to be supplied with this command. “Be plain.”</p>
			<p>Facino controlled his wrath until he found it transmuted into contempt.</p>
			<p>“Does your highness heed this witling? Did it require the welcome given me today to prove my loyalty?”</p>
			<p>“To prove it? How does it prove it?”</p>
			<p>“How?” Facino looked at the others, taking his time to answer. “If I had a disloyal thought, all I need is to go down into the streets and unfurl my banner. The banner of the dog. How long do you think would the banner of the snake be seen in Milan after that?”</p>
			<p>Gian Maria sat down abruptly, making incoherent noises in his throat, like a hound snarling over a bone. The other three, however, came to their feet, and della Torre spoke the thought of all.</p>
			<p>“A subject who proclaims himself a danger to his prince has forfeited the right to live.”</p>
			<p>But Facino laughed at them. “To it, then, sirs,” he invited. “Out with your daggers! There are three of you, and I am almost unarmed.” He paused and smiled into their sullen eyes. “You hesitate. You realise, I see, that having done it, you would need to make your souls and prepare yourselves to be torn in pieces by the mob.” He turned again to the Duke, who sat glowering. “If I boast the power which comes to me from the people’s love, it is that your highness may fully appreciate a loyalty which has no thought of using that power but to uphold your rights. These councillors of yours, who have profited by my absence to inspire in you black thoughts against me, take a different view. I will leave your highness to deliberate with them.”</p>
			<p>He stalked out with a dignity which left them in confusion.</p>
			<p>At last it was della Torre who spoke. “A hectoring bully, swollen with pride! He forces his measures down our throats, commits us to extravagance whose only purpose is to bolster his reputation as a condottiero, and proposes to save the duchy from ruin in one way by ruining it as effectively in another.”</p>
			<p>But Gabriello, weak and incompetent though he might be, and although sore from Facino’s affronts, yet realised the condottiero’s indubitable worth and recognised the cardinal fact that a quarrel with him now would mean the end of all of them. He said so, thereby plunging his half-brother into deeper mortification and stirring his two fellow-councillors into resentful opposition.</p>
			<p>“What he is doing we could do without him,” said Lonate. “Your highness could have hired these men from Boucicault, and used them to put down Facino’s insolence at the same time as Buonterzo’s.”</p>
			<p>But Gabriello showed him the weakness of his argument. “Who would have led them? Do you dream that Boucicault would hire out the troops of the King of France without full confidence in their leader? As Facino himself says, mercenaries do not hire themselves out to be slaughtered.”</p>
			<p>“Boucicault himself might have been hired,” suggested the fop.</p>
			<p>“At the price of setting the heel of the King of France upon our necks. No, no,” Gabriello was emphatic, which did not, however, restrain della Torre from debating the point with him.</p>
			<p>In the midst of the argument Gian Maria, who had sat gnawing his nails in silence, abruptly heaved himself up.</p>
			<p>“A foul plague on you and your wrangles! I am sick of both. Settle it as you like. I’ve something better to do than sit here listening to your vapourings.” And he flung out of the room, in quest of the distractions which his vapid spirit was ever craving.</p>
			<p>In his absence those three, the weakling, the fop, and the schemer, settled the fortunes of his throne. Della Torre, realising that the moment was not propitious for intrigue against Facino, yielded to Gabriello. It was decided that the Commune’s confirmation should be sought for Facino’s action in increasing his condotta.</p>
			<p>So Gabriello summoned the Communal Council, and because he feared the worst, demanded the maximum sum of thirty thousand florins monthly for Facino’s troops.</p>
			<p>The Commune of Milan, so impoverished by the continuous rebellious depredations of the last five years, was still wrangling over the matter, its members were still raising their hands and wagging their heads, when three days later Bellarion rode into Milan with a thousand horse, made up chiefly of Gascons and Burgundians, and captained by one of Boucicault’s lieutenants, an amiable gentleman named Monsieur de la Tour de Cadillac.</p>
			<p>The people’s fear of storm and pillage, whilst diminished by Facino’s presence, was not yet entirely subdued. Hence there was a glad welcome for the considerable accretion to the defensive strength represented by this French legion.</p>
			<p>That gave the Commune courage, and presently it was also to be afforded relief upon hearing that not thirty thousand florins monthly as Gabriello Maria Visconti had stated, but fifteen thousand was to be the stipend of the French lances.</p>
			<p>Facino was delightedly surprised when he learnt this from Bellarion.</p>
			<p>“You must have found that French pedlar in a singularly easy humour that he should have let you have the men on my own terms: and low terms they are.”</p>
			<p>Bellarion rendered his accounts.</p>
			<p>“I found him anything but easy, and we spent the best part of two days haggling. He began by laughing at your offer; described it as impudent; wondered if you took him for a fool. Thereupon I made shift to take my leave of him. That sobered him. He begged me not to be hasty; confessed that he could well spare the men; but that I must know the price was not more than half the worth of his soldiers. At thirty florins a month for each man he would appoint a leader for them at his own charges. I said little beyond asserting that no such price was possible; that it was beyond the means of the Commune of Milan. He then proposed twenty-five florins, and finally twenty, below which he swore by all the saints of France that he would not go. I begged him to take time for thought, and as the hour was late to let me know his decision in the morning. But in the morning I sent him a note of leave-taking, informing him that, as his terms were beyond our means and as our need was none so pressing, I was setting out for the Cantons to raise the men there.”</p>
			<p>Facino’s mouth fell open. “Body of God! That was a risk!”</p>
			<p>“No risk at all. I had the measure of the man. He was so covetous, so eager to drive the bargain, that I almost believe I could have got the men for less than your price if you had not stated it in writing. I was not suffered to depart. He sent a messenger to beg me wait upon him before leaving Genoa, and the matter was concluded on your terms. I signed the articles in your name, and parted such good friends with the French Vicar that he presented me with a magnificent suit of armour, as an earnest of his esteem of Facino Cane and Facino Cane’s son.”</p>
			<p>Facino loosed his great full-throated laugh over the discomfiture of the crafty Boucicault, slapped Bellarion’s shoulder, commended his guile, and carried him off at once to the Palace of the Ragione in the New Broletto where the Council awaited him.</p>
			<p>By one of six gates that pierced this vast walled enclosure, which was the seat of Milan’s civic authority, they came upon the multitude assembled there and to the Palace of the Ragione in its middle. This was little more than a great hall carried upon an open portico, to which access was gained by an exterior stone staircase. As they went up, Bellarion, to whom the place was new, looked over the heads of the clamorous multitude in admiring wonder at the beautiful loggia of the Osii with its delicately pointed arcade in black and white marble and its parapet hung with the shields of the several quarters of the city.</p>
			<p>Before the assembled Council, with the handsome Gabriello Maria richly robed beside the President, Facino came straight to the matter nearest his heart at the moment.</p>
			<p>“Sirs,” he said, “you will rejoice to see the increase of our strength by a thousand lances hired from the King of France in an assurance of Milan’s safety. For with a force now of some three thousand men with which to take the field against Buonterzo, you may tell the people from me that they may sleep tranquil o’ nights. But that is not the end of my good tidings.” He took Bellarion by the shoulder, and thrust him forward upon the notice of those gentlemen. “In the terms made with Monsieur Boucicault, my adoptive son here has saved the Commune of Milan the sum of fifteen thousand florins a month, which is to say a sum of between thirty and fifty thousand florins, according to the length of this campaign.” And he placed the signed and sealed parchment which bore the articles on the council table for their inspection.</p>
			<p>This was good news, indeed; almost as good, considering their depleted treasury, as would have been the news of a victory. They did not dissemble their satisfaction. It grew as they considered it. Facino dilated upon Messer Bellarion’s intelligent care of their interests. Such foresight and solicitude were unusual in a soldier, and were usually left by soldiers contemptuously to statesmen. This the President of the Council frankly confessed in the little speech in which he voiced the Commune’s thanks to Messer Bellarion, showing that he took it for granted that a son of Facino’s, by adoption or nature, must of necessity be a soldier.</p>
			<p>Nor was the expression of that gratitude confined to words. In the glow of their enthusiasm, the Communal Council ended by voting Messer Bellarion a sum of five thousand florins as an earnest of appreciation of his care of their interests.</p>
			<p>Thus, suddenly and without warning Bellarion found not merely fame but⁠—as it seemed to his modest notions⁠—riches thrust upon him. The President came to shake him by the hand, and after the President there was the Ducal Governor, the Lord Gabriello Maria Visconti, sometime Prince of Pisa.</p>
			<p>For once he was almost disconcerted.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
