<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>IX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-3" id="chapter3-9" epub:type="chapter">
			<h4>CHAPTER IX<br/>
			<br/>
			VERCELLI</h4>
			<p>A letter survives which the Prince of Valsassina wrote some little time after these events to Duke Filippo Maria, in which occurs the following criticism of the captains of his day: ‘They are stout fellows and great fighters, but rude, unlettered, and lacking culture. Their minds are fertile, vigorous soil, but unbroken by the plough of learning, so that the seeds of knowledge with which they are all too sparsely sown find little root there.’</p>
			<p>At Carpignano, when they came there three days after breaking camp, they found that all had fallen out as Bellarion calculated. A detachment of horse one hundred strong had been sent in haste with the necessary implements to destroy the bridge. That detachment Stoffel had surrounded, captured, disarmed, and disbanded.</p>
			<p>They crossed, and after another three days marching down the right bank of the Sesia they crossed the Cervo just above Quinto, where Bellarion took up his quarters in the little castle owned there by the Lord Girolamo Prato, who was with Theodore in Vercelli.</p>
			<p>Here, too, were housed the Princess and her brother and the Lord of Carmagnola, the latter by now recovered from his humiliation in the matter of his bridges to a state of normal self-complacency and arrogance.</p>
			<p>An eighteenth-century French writer on tactics, M. Dévinequi, in his ‘L’Art Militaire au Moyen Age,’ in the course of a lengthy comparison between the methods of Bellarion Cane and the almost equally famous Sir John Hawkwood, offers some strong adverse criticisms upon Bellarion’s dispositions in the case of this siege of Vercelli. He considers that as a necessary measure of preparation Bellarion when at Quinto should have thrown bridges across the Sesia above and below the city, so as to maintain unbroken his lines of circumvallation, instead of contenting himself with ferrying a force across to guard the eastern approaches. This force, being cut off by the river, could, says M. Dévinequi, neither be supported at need nor afford support.</p>
			<p>What the distinguished French writer has missed is the fact that, once engaged upon it, Bellarion was as little in earnest about the siege of Vercelli as he was about Carmagnola’s bridges. The one as much as the other was no more than a strategic demonstration. From the outset⁠—that is to say, from the time when arriving at Quinto he beheld the strong earthworks Theodore had thrown up⁠—he realised that the place was not easily to be carried by assault, and it was within his knowledge that it was too well victualled to succumb to hunger save after a siege more protracted than he himself was prepared to impose upon it.</p>
			<p>But there was Carmagnola, swaggering and thrasonical in spite of all that had gone, and there was the Princess Valeria supporting the handsome condottiero with her confidence. And Carmagnola, not content that Bellarion should girdle the city, arguing reasonably enough that months would be entailed in bringing Theodore to surrender from hunger, was loud and insistent in his demands that the place be assaulted. Once again, as in the case of the bridges, Bellarion yielded to the other’s overbearing insistence, went even the length of inviting him to plan and conduct the assaults. Three of these were delivered, and all three repulsed with ease by an enemy that appeared to Bellarion to be uncannily prescient. After the third repulse, the same suspicion occurred to Carmagnola, and he expressed it; not, however, to Bellarion, as he should have done, but to the Princess.</p>
			<p>‘You mean,’ she said, ‘that some one on our side is conveying information to Theodore of our intentions?’</p>
			<p>They were alone together in the armoury of the Castle of Quinto whose pointed windows overlooked the river. It was normally a bare room with stone walls and a vaulted white ceiling up which crawled a troop of the rampant lions of the Prati crudely frescoed in a dingy red. Bellarion had brought to it some furnishings that made it habitable, and so it became the room they chiefly used.</p>
			<p>The Princess sat by the table in a great chair of painted leather, faded but comfortable. She was wrapped in a long blue gown that was lined with lynx fur against the chill weather which had set in. Carmagnola, big and gaudy in a suit of the colour of sulphur, his tunic reversed with black fur, his powerful yet shapely legs booted to the knee, strode to and fro across the room in his excitement.</p>
			<p>‘It is what I begin to fear,’ he answered her, and resumed his pacing.</p>
			<p>A silence followed, and remained unbroken until he went to plant himself, his feet wide, his hands behind him, before the logs that blazed in the cavernous fireplace.</p>
			<p>She looked up and met his glance. ‘You know what I am thinking,’ he said. ‘I am wondering whether you may not be right, after all, in your suspicions.’</p>
			<p>Gently she shook her head. ‘I dismissed them on that night when your bridges were destroyed. His vindication was so complete, what followed proved him so right, that I could suspect him no longer. He is just a mercenary fellow, fighting for the hand that pays. I trust him now because he must know that he can win more by loyalty than by treachery.’</p>
			<p>‘Aye,’ he agreed, ‘you are right, my Princess. You are always right.’</p>
			<p>‘I was not right in my suspicions of him. So think no more of those.’</p>
			<p>Standing as he did, he was completely screening the fire from her. She rose and crossed to it, holding out her hands to the blaze when he made room for her beside him.</p>
			<p>‘I am chilled,’ she said. ‘As much, I think, by our want of progress as by these November winds.’</p>
			<p>‘Nay, but take heart, Valeria,’ he bade her. ‘The one will last no longer than the other. Spring will follow in the world and in your soul.’</p>
			<p>She looked up at him, and found him good to look upon, so big and strong, so handsome and so confident.</p>
			<p>‘It is heartening to have such a man as you for company in such days.’</p>
			<p>He took her in his arms, a masterful, irresistible fellow.</p>
			<p>‘With such a woman as you beside me, Valeria, I could conquer the world.’</p>
			<p>A dry voice broke in upon that rapture: ‘You might make a beginning by conquering Vercelli.’</p>
			<p>Starting guiltily apart, they met the mocking eyes of Bellarion who entered. He came forward easily, as handsome in his way as Carmagnola, but cast in a finer, statelier mould. ‘I should be grateful to you, Francesco, and so would her highness, if you would accomplish that. The world can wait until afterwards.’</p>
			<p>And Carmagnola, to cover his confusion and Valeria’s, plunged headlong into contention.</p>
			<p>‘I’d reduce Vercelli to-morrow if I had my way.’</p>
			<p>‘Who hinders you?’</p>
			<p>‘You do. There was that night attack⁠ ⁠…’</p>
			<p>‘Oh, that!’ said Bellarion. ‘Do you bring that up again? Will you never take my word for anything, I wonder? It is foredoomed to failure.’</p>
			<p>‘Not if conducted as I would have it.’ He came forward to the table, swaying from the hips in his swaggering walk. He put his finger on the map that was spread there. ‘If a false attack were made here, on the east, between the city and the river, so as to draw the besieged, a bold, simultaneous attack on the west might carry the walls.’</p>
			<p>‘It might,’ said Bellarion slowly, and fell to considering. ‘This is a new thought of yours, this false attack. It has its merits.’</p>
			<p>‘You approve me for once! What condescension!’</p>
			<p>Bellarion ignored the interruption. ‘It also has its dangers. The party making the feint⁠—and it will need to be a strong one or its real purpose will be guessed⁠—might easily be thrust into the river by a determined sally.’</p>
			<p>‘It will not come to that,’ Carmagnola answered quickly.</p>
			<p>‘You cannot say so much.’</p>
			<p>‘Why not? The feint will draw the besieged in that direction, but before they can sally they will be recalled by the real attack striking on the other side.’</p>
			<p>Bellarion pondered again; but finally shook his head.</p>
			<p>‘I have said that it has its merits, and it tempts me. But I will not take the risk.’</p>
			<p>‘The risk of what?’ Carmagnola was being exasperated by that quiet, determined opposition. ‘God’s death! Take charge of the feint yourself, if you wish. I’ll lead the storming party, and so that you do your part, I’ll answer for it that I am inside the town before daybreak and that Theodore will be in my hands.’</p>
			<p>Valeria had remained with her shoulders to them facing the fire. Bellarion’s entrance, discovering her in Carmagnola’s arms, had covered her with confusion, filled her with a vexation not only against himself but against Carmagnola also. From this there was no recovery until Camagnola’s words came now to promise a conclusion of their troubles far speedier than any she had dared to hope.</p>
			<p>‘You’ll answer for it?’ said Bellarion. ‘And if you fail?’</p>
			<p>‘I will not fail. You say yourself that it is soundly planned.’</p>
			<p>‘Did I say so much? Surely not. To be frank, I am more afraid of Theodore of Montferrat than of any captain I’ve yet opposed.’</p>
			<p>‘Afraid!’ said Carmagnola, and sneered.</p>
			<p>‘Afraid,’ Bellarion repeated quietly. ‘I don’t charge like a bull. I like to know exactly where I am going.’</p>
			<p>‘In this case, I have told you.’</p>
			<p>Valeria slowly crossed to them. ‘Make the endeavour, at least, Lord Prince,’ she begged him.</p>
			<p>He looked from one to the other of them. ‘Between you, you distract me a little. And you do not learn, which is really sad. Well, have your way, Francesco. The adventure may succeed. But if it fails, do not again attempt to persuade me to any course through which I do not clearly see my way.’</p>
			<p>Valeria in her thanks was nearer to friendliness than he had ever known since that last night at Casale. Those thanks he received with a certain chill austerity.</p>
			<p>It was to be Carmagnola’s enterprise, and he left it to Carmagnola to make all the dispositions. The attempt was planned for the following night. It was to take place precisely at midnight, which at that time of year was the seventh hour, and the signal for launching the false attack was to be taken from the clock on San Vittore, one of the few clocks in Italy at that date to strike the hour. After an interval sufficient to allow the defenders to engage on that side, Carmagnola would open the real attack.</p>
			<p>Empanoplied in his armour, and carrying his peaked helm in the crook of his arm, Carmagnola went to ask of the Princess a blessing on his enterprise. She broke into expressions of gratitude.</p>
			<p>‘Do not thank me yet,’ he said. ‘Before morning, God helping me, I shall lay the State of Montferrat at your feet. Then I shall ask your thanks.’</p>
			<p>She flushed under his ardent gaze. ‘I shall pray for you,’ she promised him very fervently, and laid a hand upon his steel brassard. He bore it to his lips, bowed stiffly, and clanked out of the room.</p>
			<p>Bellarion did not come to seek her. Lightly armed, with no more than back and breast and a steel cap on his head, he led out his men through the night, making a wide détour so that their movements should not be heard in Vercelli. Since mobility was of the first importance, he took with him only a body of some eight hundred horse. They filed along by the river to the east of the city, which loomed there a vast black shadow against the faintly irradiated sky. They took up their station, dismounted, unlimbered the scaling ladders which they had brought for the purposes of their demonstration, and waited.</p>
			<p>They were, as Bellarion calculated, close upon the appointed hour when at one point of the line there was a sudden commotion. A man had been caught who had come prowling forward, and who, upon being seized, demanded to be taken at once before their leader.</p>
			<p>Roughly they did as he required of them. And there in the dark, for they dared kindle no betraying light, Bellarion learnt that he was a loyal subject of the Duke of Milan who had slipped out of the city to inform them that the Marquis Theodore was advised of their attack and ready to meet it.</p>
			<p>Bellarion swore profusely, a rare thing in him who seldom allowed himself to be mastered by his temper. But his fear of Theodore’s craft drove him now like a fiery spur. If Theodore was forewarned, who could say what countermeasures Theodore had not prepared? This came of lending ear to that bellowing calf Carmagnola!</p>
			<p>Fiercely he gave the order to mount. There was some delay in the dark, and whilst they were still being marshalled the bell of San Vittore tolled the seventh hour. Some moments after that were lost before they were spurring off to warn and withdraw Carmagnola. Even then it was necessary to go cautiously through the dark over ground now sodden by several days of rain.</p>
			<p>Before they were halfway round the din of combat burst upon the air.</p>
			<p>Theodore had permitted Carmagnola’s men to reach and faggot the moat, and even to plant some ladders, before moving. Then he had thrown out his army, in two wings, one from the gate to the north, the other from a gate on the opposite side, and these two wings had swept round to charge Carmagnola in flank and to envelop him.</p>
			<p>Two things only saved Carmagnola: in the first place, Theodore’s counter-attack was prematurely launched, before Carmagnola was sufficiently committed; in the second, Stoffel, taking matters into his own hands, and employing the infantry tactics advocated by Bellarion, drew off his men, and formed them up to receive the charge he heard advancing from the north. That charge cost Theodore a score of piked horses, and it failed to break through the bristling human wall that rose before it in the dark. Having flung the charge back, Stoffel, formed his men quickly into the hedgehog, embracing within it all that he could compass of Carmagnola’s other detachments, and in this formation proceeded to draw off, intent upon saving all that he could from the disaster that was upon them.</p>
			<p>Meanwhile the other battle, issuing from the gate on the south and led by Theodore himself, had crashed into Carmagnola’s own body, which Carmagnola and Belluno were vainly seeking to marshal. They might have made an end of that detachment, which comprised the best part of Bellarion’s condotta, had not Bellarion with his eight hundred horse at last come up to charge the enemy rear. That was the saving stroke. Caught now between two masses, realising that his counter-surprise had failed, and unable in the dark to attempt a fresh manœuvre, Theodore ordered his trumpeters to sound the retreat.</p>
			<p>Each side accounted itself fortunate in being able to retire in good order.</p>
			<p>
				<br/>
				<br/>
				<br/>
			</p>
			<p>
				<a id="chap10_III"/>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
