<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>II</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-3" id="chapter3-2" epub:type="chapter">
			<h4>The Battle of Novi</h4>
			<p>The rest of this affair⁠—this campaign against the too-ambitious vicar of the King of France⁠—is a matter of history, which you may read in the chronicles of Messer Corio and elsewhere.</p>
			<p>With a powerful army numbering close upon twelve thousand men, Facino descended upon Genoa, which surrendered without a blow. At first there was alarm at the advance of so large an army. The fear of pillage with its attendant violence ran though the Genoese, who took the precaution of sending their women and their valuables to the ships in the harbour. Then the representatives of the people went out to meet Facino, and to assure him that they would welcome him and the deliverance from the French yoke provided that he would not bring his troops into the city.</p>
			<p>‘The only purpose for which I could wish to do so,’ Facino answered from the litter to which he was confined by the gout, grown worse since he had left Alessandria, ‘would be to enforce the rightful claims of the Marquis of Montferrat. But if you will take him for your prince, my army need advance no nearer. On the contrary, I will withdraw it towards Novi to make of it a shield against the wrath of the Marshal Boucicault when he returns!’</p>
			<p>And so it befell that, attended only by five hundred of his own men, Theodore of Montferrat made his state entry into Genoa on the morrow, hailed as a deliverer by the multitude, whilst Facino fell back on Novi, there to lie in wait for Boucicault. Nor was his patience tried. Upon Boucicault confidently preparing for Facino’s attack, the news of the happenings in Genoa fell like a thunderbolt from a clear sky.</p>
			<p>Between fury and panic he quitted Milan, and by his very haste destroyed what little chance he may ever have had of mending the situation. By forced marches he reached the plains about Novi to find the road held against his jaded men. And here he piled error upon error. Being informed that Facino himself, incapacitated by the gout, had been carried that morning into Genoa, and that his army was commanded in his absence by his adoptive son Bellarion, the French commander decided to strike at once before Facino should recover and return to direct the operations in person.</p>
			<p>The ground was excellent for cavalry, and entirely of cavalry some four thousand strong was Boucicault’s main battle composed. Leading it in person, he hurled it upon the enemy centre in a charge which he thought must irresistibly cleave through. Nor did the mass of infantry of which Bellarion’s centre was composed resist. It yielded ground before the furious onslaught of the French lances. Indeed, as if swayed by panic, it began to yield long before any contact was established, and the French in their rash exultation never noticed the orderliness of that swift retreat, never suspected the trap, until they were fast caught in it. For whilst the centre yielded, the wings stood firm, and the wings were entirely composed of horse, the right commanded by the Piedmontese Trotta, the left by Carmagnola, who, sulky and disgruntled at his supersession in a supreme command which he deemed his right, had never wearied of denouncing this disposition of forces as an insensate reversal of all the known rules.</p>
			<p>Back and back, ever more swiftly fell the foot. On and on pressed the French, their lances couched, their voices already clamantly mocking these opponents, who were being swept away like leaves by the mere gust of the charge.</p>
			<p>Bellarion, riding in the rear of his retreating infantry with a mounted trumpeter beside him, uttered a single word. A trumpet blast rang out, and before its note had died the retreat was abruptly checked. Koenigshofen’s men, who formed the van of that centre, suddenly drove the butts of their fifteen-foot German pikes into the ground. Each man of the two front ranks went down on one knee. A terrible hedge of spears suddenly confronted the men-at-arms of France, riding too impetuously in their confidence. Half a hundred horses were piked in the first impact. Then the impetus of those behind, striking the leading ranks which sought desperately to check, drove them forward onto those formidable German points. The entire charging mass was instantly thrown into confusion.</p>
			<p>‘That,’ said Bellarion grimly, ‘will teach Boucicault to respect infantry in future. Sound the charge!’</p>
			<p>The trumpeter wound another blast, thrice repeated, and in answer, as Bellarion had preconcerted, the right and left wings, which had gradually been extending, wheeled about and charged the French on both flanks simultaneously. Only then did Boucicault perceive whither his overconfident charge had carried him. Vainly did he seek to rally and steady his staggering followers. They were enveloped, smashed, ridden down before they could recover. Boucicault, himself, fighting like a man possessed, fighting, indeed, for very life, hewed himself a way out of that terrible press, and contrived to join the other two of the three battles into which he had divided his army and which were pressing forward now to the rescue. But they arrived too late. There was nothing left to rescue. The survivors of the flower of Boucicault’s army had thrown down their arms and accepted quarter, and the reserves ran in to meet a solid enemy front, which drove wedges into their ranks, and mercilessly battered them, until Boucicault routed beyond redemption drew off with what was left.</p>
			<p>‘A swift action, which was a model of the harmonious collaboration of the parts.’ Thus did Bellarion describe the battle of Novi which was to swell his ever-growing fame.</p>
			<p>Boucicault, as Bellarion said, had sought to grasp more than he could hold when he had responded to Gian Maria’s invitation, and at Novi he lost not only Milan, but Genoa as well. In ignominy he took the road to France, glad to escape with his life and some battered remnants of his army, and Italy knew him no more after that day.</p>
			<p>In the Fregoso Palace at Genoa, overlooking the harbour, where Theodore of Montferrat had taken up his quarters, and where the incapacitated Facino was temporarily lodged, there was a great banquet on the following night to celebrate at once the overthrow of the French and the accession of Theodore as Prince of Genoa. It was attended by representatives of the twelve greatest families in the State as well as by Facino, hobbling painfully on a crutch, and his captains; and whilst the official hero of the hour was Theodore, the new Prince, the real hero was Bellarion.</p>
			<p>He received without emotion, without any sign either of pride or of modesty, the tribute lavishly paid him by illustrious men and distinguished women, by the adulatory congratulatory speech of Theodore, or the almost malicious stress which Carmagnola laid on his good fortune.</p>
			<p>‘You are well named Bellarione “Fortunato,” ’ that splendid soldier had said. ‘I am still wondering what would have happened if Boucicault had perceived the trick in time.’</p>
			<p>Bellarion was coldly amiable in his reply.</p>
			<p>‘It will provide you with healthy mental exercise. Consider at the same time what might have happened if Buonterzo had fathomed our intentions at Travo, or Vignate had guessed my real purpose at Alessandria.’</p>
			<p>Bellarion moved on, leaving Camagnola to bite his lip and digest the laughter of his brother captains.</p>
			<p>His interview later with Prince Theodore was more serious. From its outset he mistrusted the fawning suavity of the courtly Regent, so that, when at the end of compliments upon his prowess, the Regent proposed to take him and his company into the pay of Montferrat at a stipend vastly in excess of that which Florence had lately paid him, Bellarion was not at all surprised. Two things became immediately clear. First, that Theodore desired greatly to increase his strength, the only reason for which could be the shirking, now that all his aims were accomplished, of his engagements towards Facino. Second, that he took it for granted⁠—as he had done before⁠—that Bellarion was just a venal, self-seeking adventurer who would never permit considerations of honour to stand in the way of profit.</p>
			<p>And the cupidity and calculation now revealed in Bellarion’s countenance assured Theodore that his skill in reading men had not been at fault on this occasion.</p>
			<p>‘You offer me⁠ ⁠…’ He broke off. Stealthily his glance swept the glittering groups that moved about the spacious white-and-gold room to Facino Cane where he sat at the far end in a great crimson chair. He lowered his voice a little. ‘The loggia is empty, my lord. We shall be more private there.’</p>
			<p>They sauntered forth to that covered balcony overlooking the great harbour where ranks of shipping drawn up against the mole were slumbering under the stars. A great towering galley was moving across the water with furled sails, her gigantic oar-blades flashing silver in the moonlight.</p>
			<p>With his glance upon that craft, his voice subdued, Bellarion spoke, and the close-set eyes of the tall, elegant Regent strained to pierce the shadows about the young condottiero’s face.</p>
			<p>‘This is a very noble offer, Lord Prince⁠ ⁠…’</p>
			<p>‘I hope I shall never begrudge a man his worth.’ It was a speech true to the character he loved to assume. ‘You are a great soldier, Bellarion. That fact is now established and admitted.’</p>
			<p>Bellarion did not contradict him. ‘I do not perceive at present your need for a great soldier, highness. True, your proposal seems to argue plans already formed. But unless I know something of them, unless I may judge for myself the likely extent of the service you require, these generous terms may in effect prove an illusion.’</p>
			<p>Theodore resumed his momentarily suspended breath. He even laughed a little, now that the venal reason for Bellarion’s curiosity was supplied. But he deemed it wise to probe a little further.</p>
			<p>‘You are, as I understand, under no present engagement to the Count of Biandrate?’</p>
			<p>Bellarion’s answer was very prompt.</p>
			<p>‘Under none. In discharge of past favours I engaged to assist him in the campaign against the Marshal Boucicault. That campaign is now ended, and with it my engagement. I am in the market, as it were, my lord.’</p>
			<p>‘That is what I assumed. Else, of course, I should not have come to you with my offer. I lose no time because soon you will be receiving other proposals. That is inevitable. For the same reason I name a stipend which I believe is higher than any condottiero has ever yet commanded.’</p>
			<p>‘But you have not named a term. That was why I desired to know your plans so that for myself I might judge the term.’</p>
			<p>‘I will make the engagement to endure for three years,’ said Theodore.</p>
			<p>‘The proposal becomes generous, indeed.’</p>
			<p>‘Is it acceptable?’</p>
			<p>Bellarion laughed softly. ‘I should be greedy if it were not.’</p>
			<p>‘It will carry the usual condition that you engage for such service as I may require and against any whom circumstances may make my enemy.’</p>
			<p>‘Naturally,’ said Bellarion. But he seemed to falter a little. ‘Naturally,’ he repeated. ‘And yet⁠ ⁠…’ He paused, and Theodore waited, craftily refraining from any word that should curb him in opening his mind. ‘And yet I should prefer that service against my Lord Facino be excepted.’</p>
			<p>‘You would prefer it?’ said Theodore. ‘But do you make it a condition?’</p>
			<p>Bellarion’s hesitation revealed him to the Regent for a man torn between interest and scruples. Weakly, at last, he said: ‘I would not willingly go in arms against him.’</p>
			<p>‘Not willingly? That I can understand. But you do not answer my question. Do you make it a condition?’</p>
			<p>Still Bellarion avoided answering.</p>
			<p>‘Would the condition make my employment impossible?’ And now it was Theodore who hesitated, or seemed to hesitate. ‘It would,’ he said at last. Very quickly he added: ‘Nothing is less likely than that Facino and I should be opposed to each other. Yet you’ll understand that I could not possibly employ a condottiero who would have the right to desert me in such a contingency.’</p>
			<p>‘Oh, yes. I understand that. I have understood it from the first. I am foolish, I suppose, to hesitate where the terms are so generous.’ He sighed, a man whose conscience was in labour. ‘My Lord Facino could hardly blame me⁠ ⁠…’ He left the sentence unfinished. And Theodore to end the rogue’s hesitation threw more weight into the scales.</p>
			<p>‘And there will be guarantees,’ he said.</p>
			<p>‘Guarantees? Ah!’</p>
			<p>‘The lands of Asti along the Tanaro from Revigliasco to Margaria to be made into a fief, and placed under your vicarship with the title of Count of Asti.’</p>
			<p>Bellarion caught his breath. He turned to face the Marquis, and in the moonlight his countenance looked very white.</p>
			<p>‘My lord, you promise something that is not yours to bestow.’</p>
			<p>‘It is to make it mine that I require your service. I am frank, you see.’</p>
			<p>Bellarion saw more. He saw the infernal subtlety with which this tempter went to work. He made clear his intentions, which must amount to no less than the conquest and occupation of all those rich lands which lay between High and Low Montferrat. To accomplish this, Alessandria, Valenza, and a score of other cities now within the Duchy of Milan would pass under his dominion. Inevitably, then, must there be war with Facino, who to the end of his days would be in arms to preserve the integrity of the Duchy. And Theodore offered this condottiero, whose services he coveted, a dazzling reward to be gained only when those aims were fulfilled.</p>
			<p>On that seducer’s arm Bellarion placed a hand that shook with excitement.</p>
			<p>‘You mean this, my lord? It is a solemn undertaking.’</p>
			<p>With difficulty Theodore preserved his gravity. How shrewdly had he not taken the measure of this greedy rogue!</p>
			<p>‘Your patent shall be made out in anticipation, and signed at the same time as the contract.’</p>
			<p>Bellarion stared out to sea. ‘Count Bellarion of Asti!’ he murmured, a man dazzled, dazed. Suddenly he laughed, and laughing surrendered his last scruple as Theodore was already confident that he would. ‘When do we sign, Lord Prince?’</p>
			<p>‘To-morrow morning, Lord Count,’ Theodore answered with a tight-lipped smile, and on that, the matter satisfactorily concluded, they quitted the loggia and parted company.</p>
			<p>They met again for the signing of the documents early on the following morning in the Regent’s closet, in the presence of the notary who had drawn up the contract at Theodore’s dictation, of two gentlemen of Montferrat, and of Werner von Stoffel, who accompanied Bellarion, and who, as Bellarion’s lieutenant, was an interested party.</p>
			<p>The notary read first the contract, which Bellarion pronounced correct in all particulars, and then the ennobling parchment whereby Theodore created him Count of Asti, anticipatorily detailing the lands which he was to hold in fief. This document already signed and sealed was delivered to Bellarion together with the contract which he was now invited to sign. The notary dipped a quill and proffered it. But Bellarion looked at the Regent.</p>
			<p>‘Documents,’ he said, ‘are perishable, and the matter contained in these is grave. For which reason I have brought with me a witness, who in case of need can hereafter testify to your undertaking, my lord.’</p>
			<p>The Marquis frowned. ‘Let Messer Stoffel examine them for himself then.’</p>
			<p>‘Not Messer Stoffel. The witness I prefer waits in your antechamber, highness.’ He stepped quickly to the door, followed by the Regent’s surprised glance. He pulled it open, and at once Facino was revealed to them, grave of countenance, leaning upon his crutch.</p>
			<p>The Regent made a noise in his throat, as Facino hobbled in to take the parchments which Bellarion proffered him. Thereafter there was a spell of dreadful silence broken at last by the Lord Theodore who was unable longer to control himself.</p>
			<p>‘You miserable trickster! You low-born, swaggering Judas! I should have known better than to trust you! I should have known that you’d be true to your false, shifty nature. You dirty fox!’</p>
			<p>‘A trickster! A Judas! A fox!’ Bellarion appealed mildly to the company against the injustice of these epithets. ‘But why such violence of terms? Could I in loyalty to my adoptive father put my signature to this contract until it had received his approval?’</p>
			<p>‘You mock me, you vile son of a dog!’</p>
			<p>Facino looked up. His face was stern, his eyes smouldered.</p>
			<p>‘Think of some fouler epithet, my lord, so that I may cast it at you. So far no term that you have used will serve my need.’</p>
			<p>That gave Theodore pause in his reviling of another. But only for a moment. Almost at once he was leaping furiously towards Facino. The feral nature under his silken exterior was now displayed. He was a man of his hands, this Regent of Montferrat, and, beggared of words to meet the present case, he was prepared for deeds. Suddenly he found Bellarion in his way, the bold, mocking eyes level with his own, and Bellarion’s right hand was behind his back, where the heavy dagger hung.</p>
			<p>‘Shall we be calm?’ Bellarion was saying. ‘There are half a dozen men of mine in the anteroom if you want violence.’</p>
			<p>He fell back, and for all that his eyes still glared he made an obvious effort to regain his self-command. It was difficult in the face of Facino’s contemptuous laughter and the words Facino was using.</p>
			<p>‘You treacherous slug! I place you in possession of Vercelli; I make you Prince of Genoa, before calling upon you to strike a single blow on my behalf, and you prepare to use this new-found power against me! You’ll drive me from Alessandria! You’ll seduce from me the best among my captains to turn his weapons against me in your service! If Bellarion had been an ingrate like yourself, if he had not been staunch and loyal, whom you dare to call a Judas, I might have known nothing of this until too late to guard myself. But I know you now, you dastardly usurper, and, by the Bones of God, your days are numbered. You’ll prepare for war on Facino Cane, will you? Prepare, then, for, by the Passion, that war is coming to you.’</p>
			<p>Theodore stood there white to the lips, between his two dismayed gentlemen, and said no word in answer.</p>
			<p>Facino, with curling lip, considered him.</p>
			<p>‘I’d never have believed it if I had not read these for myself,’ he added. Then proffered the documents to Bellarion again. ‘Give him back his parchments, and let us go. The sight of the creature nauseates me.’ And without more, he hobbled out.</p>
			<p>Bellarion lingered to tear the parchments across and across. He cast them from him, bowed ironically, and was going out with Stoffel when the Regent found his voice at last.</p>
			<p>‘You kite-hearted trickster! What stipend have you wrung from Facino as the price of this betrayal?’</p>
			<p>Bellarion paused on the threshold. ‘No stipend, my lord,’ he answered equably. ‘Merely a condition: that so soon as the affairs of Milan are settled, he will see justice done to your nephew, the Marquis Gian Giacomo, now of age to succeed, and put a definite end to your usurpation.’</p>
			<p>His sheer amazement betrayed from him the sudden question. ‘What is Gian Giacomo to you, villain?’</p>
			<p>‘Something he is, or else I should never have been at pains to make him safe from you by demanding him as a hostage. I have been labouring for him for longer than you think, highness.’</p>
			<p>‘You have been labouring for him? You? In whose pay?’</p>
			<p>Bellarion sighed. ‘You must be supposing me a tradesman, even when I am really that quite senseless thing, a knight-errant.’ And he went out with Stoffel.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
