<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>II</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-2" id="chapter2-2" epub:type="chapter">
			<h4>CHAPTER II<br/>
			<br/>
			FACINO CANE</h4>
			<p>On the ground that they had far to travel, but in reality to spare this unwelcome prisoner, Bellarion was mounted on the crupper of Squarcia’s great horse, his lightly pinioned wrists permitting him to hang on by the kennelmaster’s belt.</p>
			<p>Thus he made his first entrance into the fair city of Milan as dusk was descending. Some impression of the size and strength of it Bellarion gathered when, a couple of miles away, they made a momentary halt on a slight eminence in the plain. And though instruction had prepared him for an imposing spectacle, it had not prepared for what he actually beheld. He gazed in wonder on the great spread of those massive red walls reflected in a broad navigable moat, which was a continuation of the Ticinello, and, soaring above these, the spires of a half-dozen churches, among which he was able from what he had read to identify the slender belfry of Sant’ Eustorgio and the octagonal brick and marble tower, surmounted by its headless gilded angel, belonging to the church of Saint Gotthard, built in honour of the sainted protector of the gouty by the gout-ridden Azzo Visconti a hundred years ago.</p>
			<p>They entered the city by the Porta Nuova, a vast gateway, some of whose stonework went back to Roman times, having survived Barbarossa’s vindictive demolition nearly three centuries ago. Over the drawbridge and through the great archway they came upon a guard-house that was in itself a fortress, before whose portals lounged a group of brawny-bearded mercenaries, who talked loudly amongst themselves in the guttural German of the Cantons. Then along Borgo Nuovo, a long street in which palace stood shoulder to shoulder with hovel, and which, though really narrow by comparison with other streets of Milan, appeared generously broad to Bellarion. The people moving in this thoroughfare were as oddly assorted as the dwellings that flanked it. Sedately well-nourished, opulent men of the merchant class, glittering nobles attended by armed lackeys with blazons on their breasts, some mounted, but more on foot, were mingled here with aproned artisans and with gaunt, ragged wretches of both sexes whose aspect bespoke want and hunger. For there was little of the old prosperity left in Milan under the rule of Gian Maria.</p>
			<p>Noble and simple alike stood still to bare and incline their heads as the Duke rode past. But Bellarion, who was sharply using his eyes, perceived few faces upon which he did not catch a reflection, however fleeting, of hatred or of dread.</p>
			<p>From this long street they emerged at length upon a great open space that was fringed with elms, on the northern side of which Bellarion beheld, amid a titanic entanglement of poles and scaffolding, a white architectural mass that was vast as a city in itself. He knew it at a glance for the great cathedral that was to be the wonder of the world. It was built on the site of the old basilica of Saint Ambrose, dedicated to Mariæ Nascenti: a votive offering to the Virgin Mother for the removal of that curse upon the motherhood of Milan, as a result of which the women bore no male children, or, if they bore them, could not bring them forth alive. Gian Galeazzo had imagined his first wife, the sterile Isabella of Valois, to lie under the curse. Bellarion wondered what Gian Galeazzo thought of the answer to that vast prayer in marble when his second wife Caterina brought forth Gian Maria. There are, Bellarion reflected, worse afflictions than sterility.</p>
			<p>Gian Galeazzo had perished before his stupendous conception could be brought to full fruition, and under his degenerate son the work was languishing, and stood almost suspended, a monument as much to the latter’s misrule as to his father’s colossal ambition and indomitable will.</p>
			<p>They crossed the great square, which to Bellarion, learned in the history of the place, was holy ground. Here in the now vanished basilica the great Saint Augustine had been baptised. Here Saint Ambrose, that Roman prefect upon whom the episcopate had been almost forced, had entrenched himself in his great struggle with the Empress Justina, which marked the beginnings of that strife between Church and Empire, still kept alive by Guelph and Ghibelline after the lapse of a thousand years.</p>
			<p>Flanking the rising cathedral stood the Old Broletto, half palace, half stronghold, which from the days of Matteo Visconti had been the residence of the Lords of Milan.</p>
			<p>They rode under the portcullis into the great courtyard of the Arrengo, which derived a claustral aspect from its surrounding porticoes, and passed into the inner quadrangle known as the Court of Saint Gotthard. Here the company dismounted, and to Lonate, who held his stirrup for him, Gian Maria issued his orders concerning the prisoner before entering the palace.</p>
			<p>This bewitcher of dogs, he announced, should make entertainment for him after supper.</p>
			<p>Bellarion was conducted to a stone cell underground, which was supplied with air and as much light as would make a twilight of high noon by a grating set high in the massive door. It was very cold and pervaded by a moist, unpleasant, fungoid odour. The darkness and chill of the place struck through him gradually to his soul. He was very hungry, too, which did not help his courage, for he had eaten nothing since midday, and not so much as a crust of bread did his gaolers have the charity to offer him.</p>
			<p>At long length⁠—at the end of two hours or more⁠—the Duke’s magnificence came to visit him in person. He was attended by Messer Lonate and four men in leather jerkins, one of whom was Squarcia. His highness sought to make up in gaudiness of raiment for what he lacked of natural endowments. He wore a trailing, high-necked velvet houppelande, one half of which was white, the other red, caught about his waist by a long-tongued belt of fine gold mail that was studded with great rubies. From waist to ground the long gown fell open as he moved showing his legs which were cased, the one in white, the other in scarlet. They were the colours of his house, colours from which he rarely departed in his wear, following in this the example set him by his illustrious sire. On his head he wore a bulging scarlet cap tufted at the side into a jagged, upright mass like a cock’s comb.</p>
			<p>His goggling eyes measured the prisoner with a glance which almost sent a shudder through Bellarion.</p>
			<p>‘Well, rogue? Will you talk now? Will you confess what was the magic that you used?’</p>
			<p>‘Lord Duke, I used no magic.’</p>
			<p>The Duke smiled. ‘You need a lenten penance to bring you to a proper frame of mind. Have you never heard of the Lent of my invention? It lasts for forty days, and is a little more severe than mere fasting. But very salutary with obstinate or offending rogues, and it teaches them such a contempt of life that in the end they are usually glad to die. We’ll make a beginning with you now. I dare make oath you’ll be as sorry that you killed my dogs as that my dogs did not kill you.’ He turned to Squarcia. ‘Bring him along,’ he commanded, and stalked stiffly out.</p>
			<p>They dragged Bellarion into a larger stone chamber that was as anteroom to the cell. Here he now beheld a long wooden engine, standing high as a table, and composed of two oblong wooden frames, one enclosed within the other and connected by colossal wooden screws. Cords trailed from the inner frame.</p>
			<p>The Duke growled an order.</p>
			<p>‘Lay the rogue stark.’</p>
			<p>Without waiting to untruss his points, two of the grooms ripped away his tunic, so that in a moment he was naked to the waist. Squarcia stood aloof, seeking to dissemble his superstitious awe, and expecting calamity or intervention at any moment.</p>
			<p>The intervention came. Not only was it of a natural order, but it was precisely the intervention Squarcia should have been expecting, since it resulted from the message he had secretly carried.</p>
			<p>The heavy studded door at the top of a flight of three stone steps swung slowly open behind the Duke, and a man of commanding aspect paused on the threshold. Although close upon fifty years of age, his moderately tall and vigorous, shapely frame, his tanned, shaven face, squarely cut with prominent bone structures, his lively, dark eyes, and his thick, fulvid hair, gave him the appearance of no more than forty. A gown of mulberry velvet edged with brown fur was loosely worn over a dress of great richness, a figured tunic of deep purple and gold with hose of the colour of wine.</p>
			<p>A moment he stood at gaze, then spoke, in a pleasant, resonant voice, its tone faintly sardonic.</p>
			<p>‘Upon what beastliness is your highness now engaged?’</p>
			<p>The Duke span round; the grooms stood arrested in their labours. The gentleman came sedately down the steps. ‘Who bade you hither?’ the Duke raged at him.</p>
			<p>‘The voice of duty. First there is my duty as your governor, to see that⁠ ⁠…’</p>
			<p>‘My governor!’ Sheer fury rang in the echoing words. ‘My governor! You do not govern me, my lord, though you may govern Milan. And you govern that at my pleasure, you’ll remember. I am the master here. It is I who am Duke. You’ll be wise not to forget it.’</p>
			<p>‘Perhaps I am not wise. Who shall say what is wisdom?’ The tone continued level, easy, faintly mocking. Here was a man very sure of himself. Too sure of himself to trouble to engage in argument. ‘But there is another duty whose voice I have obeyed. Parental duty. For they tell me that this prisoner with whom you are proposing to be merry after your fashion claims to be my son.’</p>
			<p>‘They tell you? Who told you?’ There was a threat to that unknown person in the inquiry.</p>
			<p>‘Can I remember? A court is a place of gossip. When men and women discover a piece of unusual knowledge they must be airing it. It doesn’t matter. What matters to me is whether you, too, had heard of this. Had you?’ The pleasant voice was suddenly hard; it was the voice of the master, of the man who holds the whip. And it intimidated, for whilst the young Duke stormed and blustered and swore, yet he did so in a measure of defence.</p>
			<p>‘By the bones of Saint Ambrose! Did you not hear that he slew my dogs? Slew three of them, and bewitched the others.’</p>
			<p>‘He must have bewitched you, Lord Duke, at the same time, since, although you heard him claim to be my son, yet you venture to practise upon him without so much as sending me word.’</p>
			<p>‘Is it not my right? Am I not lord of life and death in my dominions?’</p>
			<p>The dark eyes flashed in that square, shaven face. ‘You are⁠ ⁠…’ He checked. He waved an imperious hand towards Squarcia Giramo. ‘Go, you, and your curs with you.’</p>
			<p>‘They are here in attendance upon me,’ the Duke reminded him.</p>
			<p>‘But they are required no longer.’</p>
			<p>‘God’s Light! You grow daily more presumptuous, Facino.’</p>
			<p>‘If you will dismiss them, you may think differently.’</p>
			<p>The Duke’s prominent eyes engaged the other’s stern glance, until, beaten by it, he swung sullenly to his knaves: ‘Away with you! Leave us!’ Thus he owned defeat.</p>
			<p>Facino waited until the men had gone, then quietly admonished the Duke.</p>
			<p>‘You set too much store by your dogs. And the sport you make with them is as dangerous as it is bestial. I have warned your highness before. One of these fine days the dogs of Milan will turn upon you and tear out your throat.’</p>
			<p>‘The dogs of Milan? On me?’ His highness almost choked.</p>
			<p>‘On you, who account yourself lord of life and death. To be Duke of Milan is not quite the same thing as to be God. You should remember it.’ Then he changed his tone. ‘That man you were hunting to-day beyond Abbiate was Francesco da Pusterla, I am told.’</p>
			<p>‘And this rogue who calls himself your son attempted to rescue him, and slew three of my best dogs.⁠ ⁠…’</p>
			<p>‘He was doing you good service, Lord Duke. It would have been better if Pusterla had escaped. As long as you hunt poor miscreants, guilty of theft or violence or of no worse crime than being needy and hungry, retribution may move slowly against you. But when you set your dogs upon the sons of a great house, you walk the edge of an abyss.’</p>
			<p>‘Do I so? Do I so? Well, well, my good Facino, as long as a Pusterla remains aboveground, so long shall my hounds be active. I don’t forget that a Pusterla was castellan of Monza when my mother died there. And you, that hear so much gossip about the town and court, must have heard what is openly said: that the scoundrel poisoned her.’</p>
			<p>Facino looked at him with such grim significance that the Duke’s high colour faded under the glance. His face grew ashen. ‘By the Bones of God!’ he was beginning, when Facino interrupted.</p>
			<p>‘This young man here was not to know your motives. Indeed, he did not know you were the leader of that vile hunt. All that he saw was a fellow-creature inhumanly pursued by dogs. None would call me a gentle, humane man. But I give you my word, Lord Duke, that he did what in his place I hope I should have had the courage to do, myself. I honour him for it. Apart from that, he told you that his name was Cane. It is a name that deserves some respect in Milan, even from the Duke.’ His voice grew cold and hard as steel. ‘Hunt the Pusterla all you please, magnificent, and at your own peril. But do not hunt the Cane without first giving me warning of the intention.’</p>
			<p>He paused. The Duke, slow-witted ever, stood between shame and rage before him, silent. Facino turned to Bellarion, his tone and manner expressing contempt of his ducal master. ‘Come, boy. His highness gives you leave. Put on your tunic and come with me.’</p>
			<p>Bellarion had waited in a fascinated amazement that held a deal of fear, based on the conviction that he escaped Scylla to be wrecked upon Charybdis. For a long moment he gazed now into that indolently good-humoured, faintly mocking countenance. Then, with mechanical obedience, he took up the garment, which had been reduced almost to rags, and followed the Count of Biandrate from that stone chamber.</p>
			<p>Sedately Facino went up the narrow staircase with no word for the young man who followed in uneasy wonder and dread speculation of what was now to follow.</p>
			<p>In a fine room that was hung with Flemish tapestries, and otherwise furnished with a richness such as Bellarion had never yet beheld, lighted by great candles in massive gilt candlesticks that stood upon the ground, the masterful Facino dismissed a couple of waiting lackeys, and turned at last to bestow a leisurely scrutiny upon his companion.</p>
			<p>‘So you have the impudence to call yourself my son,’ he said, between question and assertion. ‘It seems I have more family than I suspected. But I felicitate you on your choice of a father. It remains for you to tell me upon whom I conferred the honour of being your mother.’</p>
			<p>He threw himself into a chair, leaving Bellarion standing before him, a sorry figure in his tattered red tunic pulled loosely about him, his flesh showing in the gaps.</p>
			<p>‘To be frank, my lord, in my anxiety to avoid a violent death I overstated our relationship.’</p>
			<p>‘You overstated it?’ The heavy eyebrows were raised. The humour of the countenance became more pronouncedly sardonic. ‘Let me judge the extent of this overstatement.’</p>
			<p>‘I am your son by adoption only.’</p>
			<p>Down came the eyebrows in a frown, and all humour passed from the face.</p>
			<p>‘Nay, now! That I know for a lie. I might have got me a son without knowing it. That is always possible. I was young once, faith, and a little careless of my kisses. But I could scarcely have adopted another man’s child without being aware of it.’</p>
			<p>And now Bellarion, judging his man, staked all upon the indolent good-nature, the humorous outlook upon life which he thought to perceive in Facino’s face and voice. He answered him with a studied excess of frankness.</p>
			<p>‘The adoption, my lord, was mine; not yours.’ And then, to temper the impudence of that, he added: ‘I adopted you, my lord, in my hour of peril and of need, as we adopt a patron saint. My wits were at the end of their resources. I knew not how else to avert the torture and death to which wanton brutality exposed me, save by invoking a name in itself sufficiently powerful to protect me.’</p>
			<p>There was a pause in which Facino considered him, half angrily, so that Bellarion’s heart sank and he came to fear that in his bold throw with Fortune he had been defeated. Then Facino laughed outright, yet there was an edge to his laugh that was not quite friendly. ‘And so you adopted me for your father. Why, sir, if every man could choose his parents⁠ ⁠…’ He broke off. ‘Who are you, rogue? What is your name?’</p>
			<p>‘I am called Bellarion, my lord.’</p>
			<p>‘Bellarion? A queer name that. And what’s your story? Continue to be frank with me, unless you would have me toss you back to the Duke for an impostor.’</p>
			<p>At that Bellarion took heart, for the phrase implied that if he were frank this great soldier would befriend him at least to the extent of furthering his escape. And so Bellarion used an utter frankness. He told his tale, which was in all respects the true tale which he had told Lorenzaccio da Trino.</p>
			<p>It was, when all is said, an engaging story, and it caught the fancy of the Lord Facino Cane, as Bellarion, closely watching him, perceived.</p>
			<p>‘And in your need you chose to think that this rider who befriended you was called Facino!’ The condottiero smiled now, a little sardonically. ‘It was certainly resourceful. But this business of the Duke’s dogs? Tell me what happened there.’</p>
			<p>Bellarion’s tale had gone no farther than the point at which he had set out from Cigliano on his journey to Pavia. Nor now, in answer to this question, did he mention his adventure in Montferrat and the use he had made there already of Facino’s name, but came straight to the events of that day in the meadows by Abbiategrasso. To this part of his narrative, and particularly to that of Bellarion’s immunity from the fierce dogs, Facino listened in incredulity, although it agreed with the tale he had already heard.</p>
			<p>‘What patron did you adopt to protect you there?’ he asked, between seriousness and derision. ‘Or did you use magic, as they say.’</p>
			<p>‘I answered the Duke on that score with more literal truth than he suspected when I told him that dog does not eat dog.’</p>
			<p>‘How? You pretend that the mere name of Cane⁠ ⁠… ?’</p>
			<p>‘Oh, no. I reeked, I stank of dog. The great hound I had ripped up when it was upon me had left me in that condition, and the other hounds scented nothing but dog in me. The explanation, my lord, lies between that and miracle.’</p>
			<p>Facino slowly nodded. ‘And you do not believe in miracles?’ he asked.</p>
			<p>‘Your lordship’s patience with me is the first miracle I have witnessed.’</p>
			<p>‘It is the miracle you hoped for when you adopted me for your father?’</p>
			<p>‘Nay, my lord. My hope was that you would never hear of the adoption.’</p>
			<p>Facino laughed outright. ‘You’re a frank rogue,’ said he, and heaved himself up. ‘Yet it would have gone ill with you if I had not heard that a son had suddenly been given to me.’ To Bellarion’s amazement the great soldier came to set a hand upon his shoulder, the dark eyes, whose expression could change so swiftly from humour to melancholy, looked deeply into his own. ‘Your attempt to save Pusterla’s life without counting the risk to yourself was a gallant thing, for which I honour you, and for which you deserve well of me. And they are to make a monk of you, you say?’</p>
			<p>‘That is the Abbot’s hope.’ Bellarion had flushed a little under the sudden, unexpected praise and the softening of the voice that bestowed it. ‘And it may follow,’ he added, ‘when I return from Pavia.’</p>
			<p>‘The Abbot’s hope? But is it your own?’</p>
			<p>‘I begin to fear that it is not.’</p>
			<p>‘By Saint Gotthard, you do not look a likely priest. But that is your own affair.’ The hand fell from his shoulder, Facino turned, and sauntered away in the direction of the loggia, beyond which the night glowed luminously blue as a sapphire. ‘From me you shall have the protection you invoked when you adopted me, and to-morrow, well-accredited and equipped, you shall resume the road to Pavia and your studies.’</p>
			<p>‘You establish, my lord, my faith in miracles,’ said Bellarion.</p>
			<p>Facino smiled as he beat his hands together. Lackeys in his blue-and-white liveries appeared at once in answer to that summons. His orders were that Bellarion should be washed and fed, whereafter they would talk again.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
