<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>IX: The Marquis Theodore</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-1" id="chapter1-9" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</h3>
				<p epub:type="title">The Marquis Theodore</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>The High and Mighty Marquis Theodore Paleologo, Regent of Montferrat, gave audience as was his gracious custom each Saturday to all who sought it, and received petitions from all who proffered them.</p>
			<p>A fine man, this Marquis Theodore, standing fully six feet tall, of a good shape and soldierly carriage, despite his fifty years. His countenance was amiable and open with boldly chiselled features and healthily tanned skin. Affable of manner, accessible of person, he nowise suggested the schemer. The privilege of audience which he granted so freely was never abused, so that on the Saturday of this week with which we are dealing the attendance in the audience chamber was as usual of modest proportions. His highness came, attended by his Chancellor and his Captain of Justice, and followed by two secretaries; he made a leisurely progress through the chamber, pausing at every other step to receive this one, or to say a word to that one; and at the end of an hour departed again, one of his secretaries bearing away the single petition that had been proffered, and this by a tall, dark-haired young man who was vividly dressed in scarlet.</p>
			<p>Within five minutes of the Regent’s withdrawal, that same secretary returned in quest of the tall young man in red.</p>
			<p>“Are you named Cane, sir?”</p>
			<p>The tall young man bowed acknowledgment, and was ushered into a small, pleasant chamber, whose windows overlooked the gardens with which Bellarion had already made acquaintance. The secretary closed the door, and Bellarion found himself under the scrutiny of a pair of close-set pale eyes whose glance was crafty and penetrating. Cross-legged, the parti-coloured hose revealed by the fall of the rich gown of mulberry velvet, the Regent sat in a high-backed chair of leather wrought with stags’ heads in red and gold, his left elbow resting upon a carved writing-pulpit.</p>
			<p>Between hands that were long and fine, he held a parchment cylinder, in which Bellarion recognised the pretended petition he had proffered.</p>
			<p>“Who are you, sir?” The voice was calm and level; the voice of a man who does not permit his accents to advertise his thoughts.</p>
			<p>“My name is Bellarion Cane. I am the adoptive son of Bonifacio Cane, Count of Biandrate.”</p>
			<p>Since he had found it necessary for his present purposes to adopt a father, Bellarion had thought it best to adopt one whose name must carry weight and at need afford protection. Therefore he had conferred this honour of paternity upon that great soldier, Facino Cane, who was ducal governor of Milan.</p>
			<p>There was a flash of surprise from the eyes that conned him.</p>
			<p>“You are Facino’s son! You come from Milan, then?”</p>
			<p>“No, my lord. From the Augustinian Convent at Cigliano, where my adoptive father left me some years ago whilst he was still in the service of Montferrat. It was hoped that I might take the habit. But a restlessness of spirit has urged me to prefer the world.” Thus he married pure truth to the single falsehood he had used, the extent of which was to clothe the obscure soldier who had befriended him with the identity of the famous soldier he had named.</p>
			<p>“But why the world of Montferrat?”</p>
			<p>“Chance determined that. I bore letters from my abbot to help me on my way. It was thus I made the acquaintance of the Lord Barbaresco, and his lordship becoming interested in me, and no doubt requiring me for certain services, desired me to remain. He urged that here was a path already open to my ambition, which if steadily pursued might lead to eminence.”</p>
			<p>There was no falsehood in the statement. It was merely truth untruly told, truth unassailable under test, yet calculated to convey a false impression.</p>
			<p>A thin smile parted the Prince’s shaven lips. “And when you had learnt sufficient, you found that a surer path to advancement might lie in the betrayal of these poor conspirators?”</p>
			<p>“That, highness, is to set the unworthiest interpretation upon my motives.” Bellarion made a certain show in his tone and manner of offended dignity, such as might become the venal rascal he desired to be considered.</p>
			<p>“You will not dispute that the course you have taken argues more intelligence than honesty or loyalty.”</p>
			<p>“Your highness reproaches me with lack of loyalty to traitors?”</p>
			<p>“What was their treason to you? What loyalty do you owe to me? You have but looked to see where lies your profit. Well, well, you are worthy to be the son, adoptive or natural, of that rascal Facino. You follow closely in his footsteps, and if you survive the perils of the journey you may go as far.”</p>
			<p>“Highness! I came to serve you⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>“Silence!” The pleasant voice was scarcely raised. “I am speaking. I understand your service perfectly. I know something of men, and if I choose to use you, it is because your hope of profit may keep you loyal, and because I shall know how to detect disloyalty and how to punish it. You engage, sir, in a service full of perils.” The Regent seemed faintly to sneer. “But you have thrust yourself willingly into it. It will test you sternly and at every step. If you survive the tests, if you conquer the natural baseness and dishonesty of your nature, you shall have no cause to complain of my generosity.”</p>
			<p>Bellarion flushed despite himself under the cold contempt of that level voice and the amused contempt of those calm, pale eyes.</p>
			<p>“The quality of my service should lead your highness to amend your judgment.”</p>
			<p>“Is it at fault? Will you tell me, then, whence springs the regard out of which you betray to me the aims and names of these men who have befriended you?”</p>
			<p>Bellarion threw back his head and in his bold dark eyes was kindled a flame of indignation. Inwardly he was a little uneasy to find the Regent accepting his word so readily and upon such slight examination.</p>
			<p>“Your highness,” he choked, “will give me leave to go.”</p>
			<p>But his highness smiled, savouring his power to torture souls where lesser tyrants could torture only bodies.</p>
			<p>“When I have done with you. You came at your own pleasure. You abide at mine. Now tell me, sir: Besides the names you have here set down of these men who seek my life, do you know of any others who work in concert with them?”</p>
			<p>“I know that there are others whom they are labouring to seduce. Who these others are I cannot say, nor, with submission, need it matter to your highness. These are the leaders. Once these are crushed, the others will be without direction.”</p>
			<p>“A seven-headed hydra, of which these are the heads. If I lop off these heads⁠ ⁠…” He paused. “Yes, yes. But have you heard none others named in these councils?” He leaned forward a little, his eyes intent upon Bellarion’s face. “None who are nearer to me? Think well, Master Bellarion, and be not afraid to name names, however great.”</p>
			<p>Bellarion perceived here, almost by instinct, the peril of too great a reticence.</p>
			<p>“Since they profess to labour on behalf of the Marquis Gian Giacomo, it is natural they should name him. But I have never heard it asserted that he has knowledge of their plot.”</p>
			<p>“Nor any other?” The Marquis was singularly insistent. “Nor any other?” he repeated.</p>
			<p>Bellarion showed a blank face. “Why? What other?”</p>
			<p>“Nay, sir, I am asking you.”</p>
			<p>“No, highness,” he slowly answered. “I recall the mention of no other.”</p>
			<p>The Prince sank back into his chair, his searching eyes never quitting the young man’s face. Then he committed what in a man so subtle was a monstrous indiscretion, giving Bellarion the explanation that he lacked.</p>
			<p>“You are not deep enough in their confidence yet. Return to their councils, and keep me informed of all that transpires in them. Be diligent, and you shall find me generous.”</p>
			<p>Bellarion was genuinely aghast. “Your highness will delay to strike when by delay you may imperil⁠ ⁠… ?”</p>
			<p>He was sternly silenced. “Is your counsel sought? You understand what I require of you. You have leave to go.”</p>
			<p>“But, highness! To return amongst them now, after openly coming here to you, will not be without its danger.”</p>
			<p>The regent did not share his alarm. He smiled again.</p>
			<p>“You have chosen a path of peril as I told you. But I will help you. I discover that I have letters from Facino humbly soliciting my protection for his adoptive son whilst in Casale. It is a petition I cannot disregard. Facino is a great lord in Milan these days. My court shall be advised of it, and it will not be considered strange that I make you free of the palace. You will persuade your confederates that you avail yourself of my hospitality so that you may abuse it in their interests. That should satisfy them, and I shall look to see you here this evening. Now go with God.”</p>
			<p>Bellarion stumbled out distracted. Nothing had gone as he intended after that too promising beginning. Perhaps had he not disclosed himself as Facino Cane’s adoptive son, he would not have supplied the Regent with a pretence that should render plausible his comings and goings. But the necessity for that disclosure was undeniable. His conduct had been dictated by the conviction that he could do for the Lady Valeria what she could not without self-betrayal do for herself. Confidently he had counted upon instant action of the Regent to crush the conspirators, and so make the Princess safe from the net in which their crazy ambitions would entangle her. Instead he had made the discovery⁠—from the single indiscretion of the Regent⁠—that the Marquis Theodore was already fully aware of the existence of the conspiracy and of the identity of some, if not all, of the chief conspirators. That was why he had so readily accepted Bellarion’s tale. The disclosure agreed so completely with the Regent’s knowledge that he had no cause to doubt Bellarion’s veracity. And finding him true in these most intimate details, he readily believed true the rest of his story and the specious account of his own intervention in the affair. Possibly Bellarion’s name was already known to him as that of one of the plotters who met at Barbaresco’s house.</p>
			<p>Far, then, from achieving his real purpose, all that Bellarion had accomplished was to offer himself as another and apparently singularly apt instrument for the Regent’s dark purposes.</p>
			<p>It was a perturbed Bellarion, a Bellarion who perceived in what dangerous waters he was swimming, who came back that noontide to Barbaresco’s house.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
