<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XIV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-1" id="chapter1-14" epub:type="chapter">
			<h4>Evasion</h4>
			<p>Bellarion was returned to the common gaol, which was perched high upon the city’s red wall, to herd once more with the vile pariahs there incarcerated. But not for long. Within an hour came an order for his removal to a diminutive stone chamber whose barred, unglazed window looked out upon a fertile green plain through which the broad, silvery ribbon of the river Po coiled its way towards Lombardy.</p>
			<p>Thither a little later in the afternoon came the Marquis Theodore to visit him, in quest of the true facts. Bellarion lied to him as fluently as he had lied earlier to the Podestà. But no longer with the same falsehoods.</p>
			<p>His tale now went very near the truth. He had come under the suspicion of the conspirators last night as a result of his visit to court. Explanations had been demanded, and he had afforded them, as he exactly stated. But conscience making cowards of the conspirators, they bound him and locked him in a room until from Cigliano they should have confirmation of his tale. Count Spigno, fearing that his life might be in danger, came in the night to set him free.</p>
			<p>“Which leads me to suspect,” said Bellarion, “that Count Spigno, too, was an agent of your potency’s. No matter. I keep to the events.”</p>
			<p>The conspirators, he continued, were more watchful than Spigno suspected. They came upon the twain just as Bellarion’s bonds had been cut, and Spigno had, fortunately, thrust a dagger into his hand. They fell upon Spigno, and one of them⁠—the confusion at the moment did not permit him to say which⁠—stabbed the unfortunate count. Bellarion would have shared his fate but that he hacked right and left with fist and dagger, wounding Barbaresco and certainly one other, possibly two others. Thus he broke through them, flung down the stairs, locked himself in the room on the mezzanine, and climbed out of the window into the arms of the watch.</p>
			<p>“If your highness had not desired me to go to court, this would not have happened. But at least the conspirators are fled and the conspiracy is stifled in panic. Your highness is now safe.”</p>
			<p>“Safe!” His highness laughed hard and cruelly. There was now in his mien none of that benignity which Montferrat was wont to admire in it. The pale blue eyes were hard as steel, a furrow at the base of his aquiline nose rendered sinister and predatory the whole expression of his countenance.</p>
			<p>“Your blundering has destroyed the evidence by which I I might have made myself safe.”</p>
			<p>“My blundering! Here’s justice! Besides, if I were to give the evidence I withheld from the Podestà, if I were to give a true account of what happened at Barbaresco’s⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>“If you did that!” The Regent interrupted angrily. “How would it look, do you suppose? A vagrant rogue, the associate of a bandit was closeted yesterday with me, and so far received my countenance that he was bidden to court. It would disclose a plot, indeed. It would be said that I plotted to fashion evidence against my nephew. Do you think that I have no enemies here in Casale and elsewhere in Montferrat besides Barbaresco and his plotters? If Spigno had lived, it would have been different, or even if we had Barbaresco and the others and could now wring the truth from them under torment. But Spigno is dead and the others gone.”</p>
			<p>Bellarion deemed him bewildered by his own excessive subtleties.</p>
			<p>“Does Barbaresco’s flight give no colour to my tale?” he asked quietly.</p>
			<p>“Only until some other tale is told, as told it would be. Then what of the word of a rascal like yourself? And what of me who depend upon the word of so pitiful a knave?”</p>
			<p>“Your highness starts at shadows.” Bellarion was almost contemptuous. “In the end it may be necessary to tell my tale if I am to save my neck.”</p>
			<p>The Regent’s look and tone made Bellarion feel cold.</p>
			<p>“Your neck? Why, what does your neck matter?”</p>
			<p>“Something to me, however little to your highness.”</p>
			<p>The Regent sneered, and the hard eyes grew harder still. “You become inconvenient, my friend.”</p>
			<p>Bellarion perceived it. The Regent feared lest investigation should reveal that he had actually fostered the conspiracy for purposes of his own, using first Count Spigno and then Bellarion as his agents.</p>
			<p>“Aye, you become inconvenient,” he repeated. “Duke Gian Galeazzo would never have boggled over dealing with you. He would have wrung this precious neck by which you lay such store. Do you thank God that I am not Gian Galeazzo.”</p>
			<p>He took the cloak from his left arm. From within its folds he let fall at Bellarion’s feet a coil of rope; from his breast he drew two stout files which he placed upon Bellarion’s stool.</p>
			<p>“If you remove one of those bars, that should give you passage. Attach the rope to another, and descend by it at dusk. When you touch ground, you will be outside the walls. Go your ways and never cross the frontiers of Montferrat again. If you do, my friend, I promise you that you shall be hanged out of hand for having broken prison.”</p>
			<p>“I should deserve it,” said Bellarion. “Your highness need have no anxiety.”</p>
			<p>“Anxiety, you dog!” The Regent measured him with that cold glance a moment, then swung on his heel and left him.</p>
			<p>Next morning, when it was learnt that the prisoner had escaped, wild and varied were the speculations in Casale to explain it, and stern, searching, and fruitless the inquiry conducted by the governor of the prison. None was known to have visited Bellarion save only the Marquis Theodore, and only one person was so mad as to suppose that the Regent had made possible the evasion.</p>
			<p>“You see,” said the Princess Valeria to her faithful Dionara. “Has my prophecy been fulfilled? Was I not right in my reading of this sordid page?” But in her dark eyes there was none of the exultation that verified conjecture so often brings.</p>
			<p>And at about the same time, Bellarion, having found a fisherman to put him across the Po beyond Frassinetto, was trudging mechanically along, safe now in the territory of Milan. But his thoughts went back to Montferrat and the Princess Valeria.</p>
			<p>“In her eyes I am a rogue, a spy, a trickster, and perhaps worse, which matters nothing, for in her eyes I never could have been anything that signifies. Nor does it really matter that she should know why Spigno died. Let her think what she will. I have made her and her brother safe for the present.”</p>
			<p>That night he lay at an inn at Candia, and reflected that he lay there at the Princess Valeria’s charges, for he still possessed three of the five ducats she had given him for his needs.</p>
			<p>“Some day,” he said, “I shall repay that loan.”</p>
			<p>Next morning he was up betimes to resume at last in earnest his sorely interrupted journey to Pavia. But he found that the Muses no longer beckoned him as alluringly as hitherto. He had in the last few days tasted stronger waters than those of Castalia’s limpid spring. He had also made the discovery that in fundamental matters all his past learning had but served to lead him astray. He questioned now his heresy on the score of sin. It was possible that, after all, the theologians might be right. Whether sin and evil were convertible terms he could not be sure. But not only was he quite sure that there was no lack of evil in the world; he actually began to wonder if evil were not the positive force that fashions the destinies of men, whilst good is but a form of resistance which, however strong, remains passive, or else, when active, commonly operates through evil that it may ultimately prevail.</p>
			<p>So much for his syllogism which had seemed irrefragable. It had fallen to dust at the first touch of worldly experience. Yet, for all his apprehension of the world’s wickedness it was with a sigh of regret that he turned his back upon it. The school of living, striving men called him now with a voice far stronger than that of Pavia and the learned Chrysolaras, and reminded him that he was pledged to a service which he could not yet consider fully rendered.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
